1. Brain. 2020 Jun 1;143(6):1920-1933. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa137.

Development and validation of an interpretable deep learning framework for 
Alzheimer's disease classification.

Qiu S(1)(2), Joshi PS(3), Miller MI(1), Xue C(1), Zhou X(2), Karjadi C(4), Chang 
GH(1), Joshi AS(5), Dwyer B(6), Zhu S(6), Kaku M(6), Zhou Y(7), Alderazi 
YJ(8)(9), Swaminathan A(10), Kedar S(10), Saint-Hilaire MH(6), Auerbach 
SH(4)(6), Yuan J(7), Sartor EA(6), Au R(3)(4)(6)(11)(12), Kolachalama 
VB(1)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Section of Computational Biomedicine, Department of Medicine, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)College of Arts and Sciences, Boston University, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)The Framingham Heart Study, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(5)College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, 
TX, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 
Lubbock, TX, USA.
(10)Department of Neurological Sciences, College of Medicine, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Boston University Alzheimer's Disease Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Hariri Institute for Computing and Computational Science & Engineering, 
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.

Alzheimer's disease is the primary cause of dementia worldwide, with an 
increasing morbidity burden that may outstrip diagnosis and management capacity 
as the population ages. Current methods integrate patient history, 
neuropsychological testing and MRI to identify likely cases, yet effective 
practices remain variably applied and lacking in sensitivity and specificity. 
Here we report an interpretable deep learning strategy that delineates unique 
Alzheimer's disease signatures from multimodal inputs of MRI, age, gender, and 
Mini-Mental State Examination score. Our framework linked a fully convolutional 
network, which constructs high resolution maps of disease probability from local 
brain structure to a multilayer perceptron and generates precise, intuitive 
visualization of individual Alzheimer's disease risk en route to accurate 
diagnosis. The model was trained using clinically diagnosed Alzheimer's disease 
and cognitively normal subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) dataset (n = 417) and validated on three independent cohorts: 
the Australian Imaging, Biomarker and Lifestyle Flagship Study of Ageing (AIBL) 
(n = 382), the Framingham Heart Study (n = 102), and the National Alzheimer's 
Coordinating Center (NACC) (n = 582). Performance of the model that used the 
multimodal inputs was consistent across datasets, with mean area under curve 
values of 0.996, 0.974, 0.876 and 0.954 for the ADNI study, AIBL, Framingham 
Heart Study and NACC datasets, respectively. Moreover, our approach exceeded the 
diagnostic performance of a multi-institutional team of practicing neurologists 
(n = 11), and high-risk cerebral regions predicted by the model closely tracked 
post-mortem histopathological findings. This framework provides a clinically 
adaptable strategy for using routinely available imaging techniques such as MRI 
to generate nuanced neuroimaging signatures for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis, 
as well as a generalizable approach for linking deep learning to 
pathophysiological processes in human disease.

© The Author(s) (2020). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awaa137
PMCID: PMC7296847
PMID: 32357201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Sep;108:21-43. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 11.

Decoding Alzheimer's disease from perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism: 
implications for diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

Chen Z(1), Zhong C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related devastating neurodegenerative 
disorder, which severely impacts on the global economic development and 
healthcare system. Though AD has been studied for more than 100 years since 
1906, the exact cause(s) and pathogenic mechanism(s) remain to be clarified. 
Also, the efficient disease-modifying treatment and ideal diagnostic method for 
AD are unavailable. Perturbed cerebral glucose metabolism, an invariant 
pathophysiological feature of AD, may be a critical contributor to the 
pathogenesis of this disease. In this review, we firstly discussed the features 
of cerebral glucose metabolism in physiological and pathological conditions. 
Then, we further reviewed the contribution of glucose transportation abnormality 
and intracellular glucose catabolism dysfunction in AD pathophysiology, and 
proposed a hypothesis that multiple pathogenic cascades induced by impaired 
cerebral glucose metabolism could result in neuronal degeneration and 
consequently cognitive deficits in AD patients. Among these pathogenic 
processes, altered functional status of thiamine metabolism and brain insulin 
resistance are highly emphasized and characterized as major pathogenic 
mechanisms. Finally, considering the fact that AD patients exhibit cerebral 
glucose hypometabolism possibly due to impairments of insulin signaling and 
altered thiamine metabolism, we also discuss some potential possibilities to 
uncover diagnostic biomarkers for AD from abnormal glucose metabolism and to 
develop drugs targeting at repairing insulin signaling impairment and correcting 
thiamine metabolism abnormality. We conclude that glucose metabolism abnormality 
plays a critical role in AD pathophysiological alterations through the induction 
of multiple pathogenic factors such as oxidative stress, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, and so forth. To clarify the causes, pathogeneses and consequences 
of cerebral hypometabolism in AD will help break the bottleneck of current AD 
study in finding ideal diagnostic biomarker and disease-modifying therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.06.004
PMID: 23850509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2015 Jun;1(1):46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2015.03.001.

Using baseline cognitive severity for enriching Alzheimer's disease clinical 
trials: How does Mini-Mental State Examination predict rate of change?

Kennedy RE(1), Cutter GR(1), Wang G(1), Schneider LS(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.
(2)University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
California.

BACKGROUND: Post hoc analyses from clinical trials in Alzheimer's disease 
suggest more cognitively impaired participants respond differently from less 
impaired on cognitive outcomes. We examined pooled clinical trials data to 
assess the utility of enriching trials using baseline cognition.
METHODS: We included 2,882 participants with mild to moderate AD in 7 studies 
from a meta-database. We used mixed effects models to estimate rate of decline 
in ADAS-cog scores among MMSE groups.
FINDINGS: Baseline MMSE category was associated with baseline scores and rate of 
decline on the ADAS-cog, adjusting for age and education (both p<0.001). Greater 
baseline cognitive impairment was associated with more rapid progression.
INTERPRETATIONS: Although we found significant differences in rate of decline, 
the majority of differences between individuals were from baseline ADAS-cog 
values. Enrichment based on MMSE would reduce the recruitment pool while adding 
only slightly to detecting differences in rate of progression and is not 
advised.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2015.03.001
PMCID: PMC5040516
PMID: 27695707

Conflict of interest statement: statement [During the 36 month window before 
submission] Disclosures of all authors’ financial relationships deemed relevant 
to the manuscript: Dr. Lon S. Schneider reports being an editor on the Cochrane 
Collaboration Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group, which oversees 
systematic reviews of drugs for cognitive impairment and dementia; receiving a 
grant from the Alzheimer’s Association for a registry for dementia and cognitive 
impairment trials; within the past 3 years receiving grant or research support 
from NIA, Baxter, Eli Lilly, Forum, Genentech, Lundbeck, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer 
and Tau Rx; and having served as a consultant for or receiving consulting fees 
from AC Immune, Allon, AstraZeneca, Avraham Pharmaceutical, Ltd, Baxter, Biogen 
Idec, Cerespir, Cytox, Elan, Eli Lilly, Forum, GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & 
Johnson, Lundbeck, Merck, Pfizer, Roche, Servier, Takeda, Toyama, and Zinfandel. 
Dr. Richard E. Kennedy reports receiving grant support from NIA, NINDS, NHLBI, 
NIDDK, and the Department of Education. Mr. Guoqiao Wang reports receiving grant 
support from NIA. Dr. Gary R. Cutter reports receiving grant or research support 
from Participation of Data and Safety Monitoring Committees: All of the below 
organizations are focused on medical research: Apotek, Biogen-Idec, Cleveland 
Clinic, Glaxo Smith Klein Pharmaceuticals, Gilead Pharmaceuticals, 
Modigenetech/Prolor, Merck/Ono Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Neuren, Revalesio, 
Sanofi-Aventis, Teva, Vivus, NHLBI (Bone Marrow Transplant Protocol Review 
Committee), NINDS, NMSS, NICHD (OPRU oversight committee). Consulting, Speaking 
fees & Adviosry Boards: Alexion, Allozyne, Bayer, Celgene, Coronado Biosciences, 
Consortium of MS Centers (grant), Diogenix, Klein-Buendel Incorporated, 
Medimmune, Novartis, Nuron Biotech, Receptos, Spiniflex Pharmaceuticals, Teva 
pharmaceuticals. Dr. Cutter is employed by the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham and President of Pythagoras, Inc. a private consulting company 
located in Birmingham AL.


4. J Med Internet Res. 2023 Dec 1;25:e49147. doi: 10.2196/49147.

A Stable and Scalable Digital Composite Neurocognitive Test for Early Dementia 
Screening Based on Machine Learning: Model Development and Validation Study.

Gu D(1)(2), Lv X(1)(2), Shi C(1)(2), Zhang T(3), Liu S(4), Fan Z(1)(2)(5), Tu 
L(1)(2)(5), Zhang M(1)(2)(6), Zhang N(7), Chen L(8), Wang Z(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), 
Zhang Y(1)(2)(5), Li H(1)(2), Wang L(1)(2), Zhu J(1)(2), Zheng Y(1)(2), Wang 
H(#)(1)(2), Yu X(#)(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI)(9).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Division, Dementia Care and Research Center, Peking 
University Institute of Mental Health (Sixth Hospital), Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Dementia Key Lab, National Clinical Research Center for Mental 
Disorders (Peking University), National Health Committee Key Laboratory of 
Mental Health, Beijing, China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health 
Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(5)Beijing Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, National Clinical Research Center 
for Mental Disorders, Beijing Anding Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, The Third Afﬁliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 
Tianjin, China.
(8)China Telecom Digital Intelligence Technology Co.,Ltd, Beijing, China.
(9)see Acknowledgements, .
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Dementia has become a major public health concern due to its heavy 
disease burden. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage between 
healthy aging and dementia. Early identification of MCI is an essential step in 
dementia prevention.
OBJECTIVE: Based on machine learning (ML) methods, this study aimed to develop 
and validate a stable and scalable panel of cognitive tests for the early 
detection of MCI and dementia based on the Chinese Neuropsychological Consensus 
Battery (CNCB) in the Chinese Neuropsychological Normative Project (CN-NORM) 
cohort.
METHODS: CN-NORM was a nationwide, multicenter study conducted in China with 871 
participants, including an MCI group (n=327, 37.5%), a dementia group (n=186, 
21.4%), and a cognitively normal (CN) group (n=358, 41.1%). We used the 
following 4 algorithms to select candidate variables: the F-score according to 
the SelectKBest method, the area under the curve (AUC) from logistic regression 
(LR), P values from the logit method, and backward stepwise elimination. 
Different models were constructed after considering the administration duration 
and complexity of combinations of various tests. Receiver operating 
characteristic curve and AUC metrics were used to evaluate the discriminative 
ability of the models via stratified sampling cross-validation and LR and 
support vector classification (SVC) algorithms. This model was further validated 
in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative phase 3 (ADNI-3) cohort 
(N=743), which included 416 (56%) CN subjects, 237 (31.9%) patients with MCI, 
and 90 (12.1%) patients with dementia.
RESULTS: Except for social cognition, all other domains in the CNCB differed 
between the MCI and CN groups (P<.008). In feature selection results regarding 
discrimination between the MCI and CN groups, the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-5 
minutes Recall had the best performance, with the highest mean AUC of up to 0.80 
(SD 0.02) and an F-score of up to 258.70. The scalability of model 5 (Hopkins 
Verbal Learning Test-5 minutes Recall and Trail Making Test-B) was the lowest. 
Model 5 achieved a higher level of discrimination than the Hong Kong Brief 
Cognitive test score in distinguishing between the MCI and CN groups (P<.05). 
Model 5 also provided the highest sensitivity of up to 0.82 (range 0.72-0.92) 
and 0.83 (range 0.75-0.91) according to LR and SVC, respectively. This model 
yielded a similar robust discriminative performance in the ADNI-3 cohort 
regarding differentiation between the MCI and CN groups, with a mean AUC of up 
to 0.81 (SD 0) according to both LR and SVC algorithms.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a stable and scalable composite neurocognitive test 
based on ML that could differentiate not only between patients with MCI and 
controls but also between patients with different stages of cognitive 
impairment. This composite neurocognitive test is a feasible and practical 
digital biomarker that can potentially be used in large-scale cognitive 
screening and intervention studies.

©Dongmei Gu, Xiaozhen Lv, Chuan Shi, Tianhong Zhang, Sha Liu, Zili Fan, Lihui 
Tu, Ming Zhang, Nan Zhang, Liming Chen, Zhijiang Wang, Jing Wang, Ying Zhang, 
Huizi Li, Luchun Wang, Jiahui Zhu, Yaonan Zheng, Huali Wang, Xin Yu, Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Originally published in the Journal of 
Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 01.12.2023.

DOI: 10.2196/49147
PMCID: PMC10724812
PMID: 38039074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


5. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Sep;20(9):6008-6031. doi: 10.1002/alz.14065. Epub 2024 
Jul 28.

Osteopontin: A novel marker of pre-symptomatic sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Quesnel MJ(1)(2), Labonté A(2)(3), Picard C(2)(3), Bowie DC(1)(2), Zetterberg 
H(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Blennow K(4)(5)(10)(11), Brinkmalm A(4)(5), Villeneuve 
S(1)(2)(3), Poirier J(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
PREVENT‐AD Research Group.

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Québec, Canada.
(3)Centre for the Studies in the Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease, Douglas 
Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Québec, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SU/Sahlgrenska, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
SU/Mölndals sjukhus, Mölndal, Sweden.
(6)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen 
Square, London, UK.
(7)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(8)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hong Kong Science Park, 
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China.
(9)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(10)Paris Brain Institute, ICM, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, 
Paris, France.
(11)Neurodegenerative Disorder Research Center, Division of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, and Department of Neurology, Institute on Aging and Brain Disorders, 
University of Science and Technology of China and First Affiliated Hospital of 
USTC, Hefei, P.R. China.

INTRODUCTION: We investigate the role of osteopontin (OPN) in participants with 
Pre-symptomatic Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 
in AD brains.
METHODS: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) OPN, AD, and synaptic biomarker levels were 
measured in 109 cognitively unimpaired (CU), parental-history positive 
Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel Treatments for Alzheimer's 
Disease (PREVENT-AD) participants, and in 167 CU and 399 participants with MCI 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. OPN levels 
were examined as a function of amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau positivity. Survival 
analyses investigated the link between OPN and rate of conversion to AD.
RESULTS: In PREVENT-AD, CSF OPN was positively correlated with synaptic 
biomarkers. In PREVENT-AD and ADNI, OPN was elevated in CSF Aβ42/40(+)/total 
tau(+) and CSF Aβ42/40(+)/phosphorylated tau181(+) individuals. In ADNI, OPN was 
increased in Aβ(+) positron emission tomography (PET) and tau(+) PET 
individuals, and associated with an accelerated rate of conversion to AD. OPN 
was elevated in autopsy-confirmed AD brains.
DISCUSSION: Strong associations between CSF OPN and key markers of AD 
pathophysiology suggest a significant role for OPN in tau neurobiology, 
particularly in the early stages of the disease.
HIGHLIGHTS: In the Pre-symptomatic Evaluation of Experimental or Novel 
Treatments for Alzheimer's Disease cohort, we discovered that cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) osteopontin (OPN) levels can indicate early synaptic dysfunction, 
tau deposition, and neuronal loss in cognitively unimpaired elderly with a 
parental history. CSF OPN is elevated in amyloid beta(+) positron emission 
tomography (PET) and tau(+) PET individuals. Elevated CSF OPN is associated with 
an accelerated rate of conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Elevated CSF OPN 
is associated with an accelerated rate of cognitive decline on the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale 13, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, 
Mini-Mental State Examination, and Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes. 
OPN mRNA and protein levels are significantly upregulated in the frontal cortex 
of autopsy-confirmed AD brains.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14065
PMCID: PMC11497655
PMID: 39072932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP serves as a scientific advisor to the 
Alzheimer Society of France. HZ has served on scientific advisory boards and/or 
as a consultant for Abbvie, Acumen, Alector, Alzinova, ALZPath, Annexon, 
Apellis, Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, Nervgen, Novo 
Nordisk, Optoceutics, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Prothena, Red Abbey 
Labs, reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, and 
Wave; has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, Fujirebio, 
Alzecure, Biogen, and Roche; and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in 
Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program 
(outside submitted work). KB has served as a consultant and on advisory boards 
for Acumen, ALZPath, BioArctic, Biogen, Eisai, Lilly, Moleac Pte. Ltd, Novartis, 
Ono Pharma, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers; has served on 
data monitoring committees for Julius Clinical and Novartis; has given lectures, 
produced educational materials, and participated in educational programs for AC 
Immune, Biogen, Celdara Medical, Eisai, and Roche Diagnostics; and is a 
co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part 
of the GU Ventures Incubator Program, outside the work presented in this paper. 
MJQ, AL, CP, DCB, AB, and SV have nothing to disclose. Author disclosures are 
available in the supporting information.


6. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Apr 7;14:840386. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.840386. 
eCollection 2022.

Prediction Models for Conversion From Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Chen Y(1), Qian X(2), Zhang Y(1), Su W(1), Huang Y(1), Wang X(1), Chen X(1), 
Zhao E(1), Han L(1)(3), Ma Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Evidence-Based Nursing, School of Nursing, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Second Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Nursing, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, China.
(4)First School of Clinical Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating 
neurodegenerative disorder with no cure, and available treatments are only able 
to postpone the progression of the disease. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is 
considered to be a transitional stage preceding AD. Therefore, prediction models 
for conversion from MCI to AD are desperately required. These will allow early 
treatment of patients with MCI before they develop AD. This study performed a 
systematic review and meta-analysis to summarize the reported risk prediction 
models and identify the most prevalent factors for conversion from MCI to AD.
METHODS: We systematically reviewed the studies from the databases of PubMed, 
CINAHL Plus, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane Library, which were searched 
through September 2021. Two reviewers independently identified eligible articles 
and extracted the data. We used the Critical Appraisal and Data Extraction for 
Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modeling Studies (CHARMS) checklist for the 
risk of bias assessment.
RESULTS: In total, 18 articles describing the prediction models for conversion 
from MCI to AD were identified. The dementia conversion rate of elderly patients 
with MCI ranged from 14.49 to 87%. Models in 12 studies were developed using the 
data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). C-index/area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of development models 
were 0.67-0.98, and the validation models were 0.62-0.96. MRI, apolipoprotein E 
genotype 4 (APOE4), older age, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive (ADAS-cog) score were the most 
common and strongest predictors included in the models.
CONCLUSION: In this systematic review, many prediction models have been 
developed and have good predictive performance, but the lack of external 
validation of models limited the extensive application in the general 
population. In clinical practice, it is recommended that medical professionals 
adopt a comprehensive forecasting method rather than a single predictive factor 
to screen patients with a high risk of MCI. Future research should pay attention 
to the improvement, calibration, and validation of existing models while 
considering new variables, new methods, and differences in risk profiles across 
populations.

Copyright © 2022 Chen, Qian, Zhang, Su, Huang, Wang, Chen, Zhao, Han and Ma.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.840386
PMCID: PMC9049273
PMID: 35493941

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


7. IBRO Neurosci Rep. 2022 Sep 3;13:255-263. doi: 10.1016/j.ibneur.2022.08.010. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Ensemble learning using traditional machine learning and deep neural network for 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Nguyen D(1)(2), Nguyen H(1)(2), Ong H(1)(2), Le H(3), Ha H(1)(2), Duc NT(4)(5), 
Ngo HT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, International University, Vietnam.
(2)Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, York University, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Institute of Integrated 
Technology, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, South Korea.
(5)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

In recent years, Alzheimer's disease (AD) diagnosis using neuroimaging and deep 
learning has drawn great research attention. However, due to the scarcity of 
training neuroimaging data, many deep learning models have suffered from severe 
overfitting. In this study, we propose an ensemble learning framework that 
combines deep learning and machine learning. The deep learning model was based 
on a 3D-ResNet to exploit 3D structural features of neuroimaging data. 
Meanwhile, Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) machine learning was applied on a 
voxel-wise basis to draw the most significant voxel groups out of the image. The 
3D-ResNet and XGBoost predictions were combined with patient demographics and 
cognitive test scores (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR)) to give a final diagnosis prediction. Our proposed method 
was trained and validated on brain MRI brain images of the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. During the training phase, multiple data 
augmentation methods were employed to tackle overfitting. Our test set contained 
only baseline scans, i.e., the first visit scans since we aimed to investigate 
the ability of our approach in detecting AD during the first visit of AD 
patients. Our 5-fold cross-validation implementation achieved an average AUC of 
100% during training and 96% during testing. Using the same computer, our method 
was much faster in scoring a prediction, approximately 10 min, than feature 
extraction-based machine learning methods, which often take many hours to score 
a prediction. To make the prediction explainable, we visualized the brain MRI 
image regions that primarily affected the 3D-ResNet model's prediction via 
heatmap. Lastly, we observed that proper generation of test sets was critical to 
avoiding the data leakage issue and ensuring the validity of results.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibneur.2022.08.010
PMCID: PMC9795286
PMID: 36590098

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: None.


8. JAMA Psychiatry. 2023 Jul 1;80(7):700-709. doi: 
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1012.

Association Between False Memories and Delusions in Alzheimer Disease.

McLachlan E(1), Ocal D(2), Burgess N(3)(4), Reeves S(1), Howard R(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris JC, Perrin RJ, Shaw LM, 
Khachaturian Z, Carrillo M, Potter W, Barnes L, Bernard M, González H, Ho C, 
Hsiao JK, Jackson J, Masliah E, Masterman D, Okonkwo O, Perrin R, Ryan L, 
Silverberg N, Fleisher A, Truran Sacrey D, Fockler J, Conti C, Veitch D, Neuhaus 
J, Jin C, Nosheny R, Ashford M, Flenniken D, Kormos A, Montine T, Rafii M, Raman 
R, Jimenez G, Donohue M, Gessert D, Salazar J, Zimmerman C, Cabrera Y, Walter S, 
Miller G, Coker G, Clanton T, Hergesheimer L, Smith S, Adegoke O, Mahboubi P, 
Moore S, Pizzola J, Shaffer E, Sloan B, Harvey D, Forghanian-Arani A, Borowski 
B, Ward C, Schwarz C, Jones D, Gunter J, Kantarci K, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Reid R, 
Fox NC, Malone I, Thompson P, Thomopoulos SI, Nir TM, Jahanshad N, DeCarli C, 
Knaack A, Fletcher E, Tosun-Turgut D, Rossi Chen S, Choe M, Crawford K, 
Yushkevich PA, Das S, Koeppe RA, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Cairns 
NJ, Householder E, Franklin E, Bernhardt H, Taylor-Reinwald L, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Neu SN, Nho K, Risacher SL, Apostolova LG, Shen L, Foroud TM, 
Nudelman K, Faber K, Wilmes K, Thal L, Silbert LC, Lind B, Crissey R, Kaye JA, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Quinn J, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, 
Dagerman K, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Ziolkowski J, Heidebrink JL, 
Zbizek-Nulph L, Lord JL, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, 
Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Pacini N, Lamb A, Kass JSK, Doody RS, Shibley VS, 
Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Mintz A, Ances B, Winkfield 
D, Carroll M, Stobbs-Cucchi G, Oliver A, Creech ML, Mintun MA, Schneider S, 
Geldmacher D, Natelson Love M, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Marson D, 
Grossman H, Goldstein MA, Greenber J, Mitsis E, Shah RC, Lamar M, Samuels P, 
Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Rodriguez R, Albert M, Onyike C, Farrington L, Rudow S, 
Brichko R, Kielb S, Smith A, Ashok Raj B, Fargher K, Sadowski M, Wisniewski T, 
Shulman M, Faustin A, Rao J, Castro KM, Ulysse A, Chen S, Sheikh MO, 
Singleton-Garvin J, Murali Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Wong TZ, 
Borges-Neto S, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Vaishnavi S, Clark CM, Arnold SE, Smith 
CD, Jicha GA, El Khouli R, Raslau FD, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, 
Porsteinsson AP, Martin K, Kowalski N, Keltz M, Goldstein BS, Makino KM, Seleem 
Ismail M, Brand C, Thai G, Pierce A, Yanez B, Sosa E, Witbracht M, Kelley B, 
Nguyen T, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Hajjar I, Cellar JS, 
Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Silverman DHS, Kremen S, Apostolova L, Tingus 
K, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Woo E, Teng E, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker 
K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Mecca AP, 
Good SP, MacAvoy MG, Carson RE, Varma P, Chertkow H, Vaitekunis S, Hosein C, 
Black S, Stefanovic B, Heyn CC, Robin Hsiung GY, Kim E, Mudge B, Sossi V, 
Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Rogers J, Grant I, Muse B, Rogalski E, Robson J, Marsel Mesulam M, Kerwin D, Wu 
CK, Johnson N, Liposki K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Pomara N, Hernando R, 
Sarrael A, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Scott Turner R, Johnson K, Reynolds B, 
McCann K, Poe J, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall GA, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, 
Chao S, Coleman J, White JD, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Belden CM, Atri A, 
Clark KA, Zamrini E, Sabbagh M, Killiany R, Stern R, Mez J, Kowall N, Budson AE, 
Obisesan TO, Ntekim OE, Wolday S, Khan JI, Nwulia E, Nadarajah S, Lerner A, 
Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, Maillard P, Olichney J, Carmichael O, Bates V, 
Capote H, Rainka M, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson 
CM, Perrin A, Burke A, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Tarawneh R, Hart D, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Miller DD, Boles LL, Ekstam Smith K, Koleva H, Shim H, Won Nam K, 
Schultz SK, Williamson JD, Craft S, Cleveland J, Yang M, Sink KM, Ott BR, Drake 
J, Tremont G, Daielllo LA, Ritter A, Bernick C, Munic D, O'Connelll A, Mintzer 
J, Wiliams A, Masdeu J, Shi J, Garcia A, Newhouse P, Potkin S, Salloway S, 
Malloy P, Correia S, Kittur S, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, 
Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Lee A, 
Neylan T, Grafman J, Danowski S, Nguyen-Barrera C, Hayes J, Finley S, Bernstein 
M, Foster N, Kim S, Sood A, Blanchard KS, Arfanakis K, Fleischman D, Varon D, 
Reist C, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Mackin 
S, Drake E, Nelson C, Bikford D, Butters M, Zmuda M, Reyes D, Ho Au Y, Scherer 
K, Catalinotto D, Stark S, Ong E, Fernandez D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.

IMPORTANCE: Understanding the mechanisms of delusion formation in Alzheimer 
disease (AD) could inform the development of therapeutic interventions. It has 
been suggested that delusions arise as a consequence of false memories.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether delusions in AD are associated with false 
recognition, and whether higher rates of false recognition and the presence of 
delusions are associated with lower regional brain volumes in the same brain 
regions.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Since the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) launched in 2004, it has amassed an archive of longitudinal 
behavioral and biomarker data. This cross-sectional study used data downloaded 
in 2020 from ADNI participants with an AD diagnosis at baseline or follow-up. 
Data analysis was performed between June 24, 2020, and September 21, 2021.
EXPOSURE: Enrollment in the ADNI.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The main outcomes included false recognition, 
measured with the 13-item Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
Subscale (ADAS-Cog 13) and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) and 
volume of brain regions corrected for total intracranial volume. Behavioral data 
were compared for individuals with delusions in AD and those without using 
independent-samples t tests or Mann-Whitney nonparametric tests. Significant 
findings were further explored using binary logistic regression modeling. For 
neuroimaging data region of interest analyses using t tests, Poisson regression 
modeling or binary logistic regression modeling and further exploratory, 
whole-brain voxel-based morphometry analyses were carried out to explore the 
association between regional brain volume and false recognition or presence of 
delusions.
RESULTS: Of the 2248 individuals in the ADNI database, 728 met the inclusion 
criteria and were included in this study. There were 317 (43.5%) women and 411 
(56.5%) men. Their mean (SD) age was 74.8 (7.4) years. The 42 participants with 
delusions at baseline had higher rates of false recognition on the ADAS-Cog 13 
(median score, 3; IQR, 1 to 6) compared with the 549 control participants 
(median score, 2; IQR, 0 to 4; U = 9398.5; P = .04). False recognition was not 
associated with the presence of delusions when confounding variables were 
included in binary logistic regression models. An ADAS-Cog 13 false recognition 
score was inversely associated with left hippocampal volume (odds ratio [OR], 
0.91 [95% CI, 0.88-0.94], P < .001), right hippocampal volume (0.94 [0.92-0.97], 
P < .001), left entorhinal cortex volume (0.94 [0.91-0.97], P < .001), left 
parahippocampal gyrus volume (0.93 [0.91-0.96], P < .001), and left fusiform 
gyrus volume (0.97 [0.96-0.99], P < .001). There was no overlap between 
locations associated with false recognition and those associated with delusions.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cross-sectional study, false memories were 
not associated with the presence of delusions after accounting for confounding 
variables, and no indication for overlap of neural networks for false memories 
and delusions was observed on volumetric neuroimaging. These findings suggest 
that delusions in AD do not arise as a direct consequence of misremembering, 
lending weight to ongoing attempts to delineate specific therapeutic targets for 
treatment of psychosis.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2023.1012
PMCID: PMC10209823
PMID: 37223934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.


9. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2024 Oct;51(12):3617-3629. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-024-06784-w. Epub 2024 Jun 6.

[(18)F]FDG PET integrated with structural MRI for accurate brain age prediction.

Xue L(#)(1)(2)(3), Fu Y(#)(4)(5), Gao X(#)(6), Feng G(6), Qian S(1)(2)(3), Wei 
L(7), Li L(7), Zhuo C(4), Zhang H(8)(9)(10)(11)(12), Tian M(13)(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(4)College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(5)School of Information Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
Gansu, China.
(6)Shanghai Universal Medical Imaging Diagnostic Center, Shanghai, China.
(7)Huashan Hospital & Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 
hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(9)Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(10)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(11)College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(12)Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. hzhang21@zju.edu.cn.
(13)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 
tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(14)Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(15)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(16)Huashan Hospital & Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China. tianmei@fudan.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Brain aging is a complex and heterogeneous process characterized by 
both structural and functional decline. This study aimed to establish a novel 
deep learning (DL) method for predicting brain age by utilizing structural and 
metabolic imaging data.
METHODS: The dataset comprised participants from both the Universal Medical 
Imaging Diagnostic Center (UMIDC) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). The former recruited 395 normal control (NC) subjects, while 
the latter included 438 NC subjects, 51 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
subjects, and 56 Alzheimer's disease (AD) subjects. We developed a novel 
dual-pathway, 3D simple fully convolutional network (Dual-SFCNeXt) to estimate 
brain age using [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography ([18F]FDG 
PET) and structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) images of NC subjects as 
input. Several prevailing DL models were trained and tested using either MRI or 
PET data for comparison. Model accuracies were evaluated using mean absolute 
error (MAE) and Pearson's correlation coefficient (r). Brain age gap (BAG), 
deviations of brain age from chronologic age, was correlated with cognitive 
assessments in MCI and AD subjects.
RESULTS: Both PET- and MRI-based models achieved high prediction accuracy. The 
leading model was the SFCNeXt (the single-pathway version) for PET (MAE = 2.92, 
r = 0.96) and MRI (MAE = 3.23, r = 0.95) on all samples. By integrating both PET 
and MRI images, the Dual-SFCNeXt demonstrated significantly improved accuracy 
(MAE = 2.37, r = 0.97) compared to all single-modality models. Significantly 
higher BAG was observed in both the AD (P < 0.0001) and MCI (P < 0.0001) groups 
compared to the NC group. BAG correlated significantly with Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores (r=-0.390 for AD, r=-0.436 for MCI) and the Clinical 
Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) scores (r = 0.333 for AD, r = 0.372 
for MCI).
CONCLUSION: The integration of [18F]FDG PET with structural MRI enhances the 
accuracy of brain age prediction, potentially introducing a new avenue for 
related multimodal brain age prediction studies.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-024-06784-w
PMID: 38839623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2022 Jan;213:106503. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106503. Epub 2021 Nov 6.

Ranking convolutional neural network for Alzheimer's disease mini-mental state 
examination prediction at multiple time-points.

Qiao H(1), Chen L(2), Zhu F(3).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100049, China. Electronic address: qiaohezhe@cigit.ac.cn.
(2)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: chenlin@cigit.ac.cn.
(3)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: zhufan@cigit.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a fatal neurodegenerative 
disease. Predicting Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) based on magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) plays an important role in monitoring the progress of 
AD. Existing machine learning based methods cast MMSE prediction as a single 
metric regression problem simply and ignore the relationship between subjects 
with various scores.
METHODS: In this study, we proposed a ranking convolutional neural network 
(rankCNN) to address the prediction of MMSE through muti-classification. 
Specifically, we use a 3D convolutional neural network with sharing weights to 
extract the feature from MRI, followed by multiple sub-networks which transform 
the cognitive regression into a series of simpler binary classification. In 
addition, we further use a ranking layer to measure the ranking information 
between samples to strengthen the ability of the classification by extracting 
more discriminative features.
RESULTS: We evaluated the proposed model on ADNI-1 and ADNI-2 datasets with a 
total of 1,569 subjects. The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of our proposed 
model at baseline is 2.238 and 2.434 on ADNI-1 and ADNI-2, respectively. 
Extensive experimental results on ADNI-1 and ADNI-2 datasets demonstrate that 
our proposed model is superior to several state-of-the-art methods at both 
baseline and future MMSE prediction of subjects.
CONCLUSION: This paper provides a new method that can effectively predict the 
MMSE at baseline and future time points using baseline MRI, making it possible 
to use MRI for accurate early diagnosis of AD. The source code is freely 
available at https://github.com/fengduqianhe/ADrankCNN-master.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106503
PMID: 34798407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
declared no conflict of interests. The authors declared that they have no 
conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any 
commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in 
connection with the manuscript submitted entitled with: “Ranking convolutional 
neural network for Alzheimer’s disease mini-mental state examination prediction 
at multiple time-points”.


11. BMC Geriatr. 2023 Jul 31;23(1):462. doi: 10.1186/s12877-023-04175-8.

Prognostic relevance of gait-related cognitive functions for dementia conversion 
in amnestic mild cognitive impairment.

Tuena C(1), Maestri S(2), Serino S(3), Pedroli E(2)(4), Stramba-Badiale M(5), 
Riva G(2)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Silbert LC, Lind B, Crissey R, Kaye JA, Carter R, Dolen S, Quinn 
J, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, Dagerman K, Spann BM, Brewer 
J, Fleisher A, Vanderswag H, Ziolkowski J, Heidebrink JL, Zbizek-Nulph L, Lord 
JL, Albers CS, Petersen R, Mason SS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Villanueva-Meyer J, 
Pavlik V, Pacini N, Lamb A, Kass JS, Doody RS, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, Rountree 
S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Mintz A, Ances B, Morris JC, Winkfield D, Carroll 
M, Stobbs-Cucchi G, Oliver A, Creech ML, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Geldmacher D, 
Love MN, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Marson D, Grossman H, Goldstein MA, 
Greenberg J, Mitsis E, Shah RC, Lamar M, Samuels P, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, 
Rodriguez R, Albert M, Onyike C, Farrington L, Rudow S, Brichko R, Kielb S, 
Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Sadowski M, Wisniewski T, Shulman M, Faustin A, Rao 
J, Castro KM, Ulysse A, Chen S, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, Wong TZ, 
Borges-Neto S, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Vaishnavi S, Clark CM, Arnold SE, Smith 
CD, Jicha GA, Khouli RE, Raslau FD, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson 
AP, Martin K, Kowalski N, Keltz M, Goldstein BS, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, 
Thai G, Pierce A, Yanez B, Sosa E, Witbracht M, Kelley B, Nguyen T, Womack K, 
Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Hajjar I, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks 
WM, Silverman DHS, Kremen S, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Woo E, 
Teng E, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews 
BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Mecca AP, Good SP, MacAvoy MG, Carson RE, 
Varma P, Chertkow H, Vaitekunas S, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Heyn C, 
Hsiung GR, Kim E, Mudge B, Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternak S, 
Rachinsky I, Kertesz A, Drost D, Rogers J, Grant I, Muse B, Rogalski E, Robson 
J, Mesulam MM, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour 
B, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Weiner MW, Perry D, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, MCCann K, Poe J, Marshall GA, Sperling RA, 
Johnson KA, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Chao S, Coleman J, White JD, Lane B, Rosen A, 
Tinklenberg J, Belden CM, Atri A, Spann BM, Clark KA, Zamrini E, Sabbagh M, 
Killiany R, Stern R, Mez J, Kowall N, Budson AE, Obisesan TO, Ntekim OE, Wolday 
S, Khan JI, Nwulia E, Nadarajah S, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Bates V, Capote H, 
Rainka M, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Perrin 
A, Burke A, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Tarawneh R, Kelley B, Hart D, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Miller DD, Ponto LLB, Smith KE, Koleva H, Shim H, Nam KW, Schultz SK, 
Williamson JD, Craft S, Cleveland J, Yang M, Sink KM, Ott BR, Drake J, Tremont 
G, Daiello LA, Drake JD, Sabbagh M, Ritter A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mintz A, 
O'Connelll A, Mintzer J, Wiliams A, Masdeu J, Shi J, Garcia A, Sabbagh M, 
Newhouse P, Potkin S, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Kittur S, Pearlson GD, 
Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Relkin N, 
Chiang G, Lee A, Lin M, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Applied Technology for Neuro-Psychology Lab, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, Milan, Italy. c.tuena@auxologico.it.
(2)Applied Technology for Neuro-Psychology Lab, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, Università degli Studi Milano-Bicocca, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Faculty of Psychology, Università eCampus, Novedrate, Italy.
(5)Department of Geriatrics and Cardiovascular Medicine, IRCCS Istituto 
Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy.
(6)Humane Technology Lab, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Increasing research suggests that gait abnormalities can be a risk 
factor for Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Notably, there is growing evidence 
highlighting this risk factor in individuals with amnestic Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (aMCI), however further studies are needed. The aim of this study is 
to analyze cognitive tests results and brain-related measures over time in aMCI 
and examine how the presence of gait abnormalities (neurological or orthopedic) 
or normal gait affects these trends. Additionally, we sought to assess the 
significance of gait and gait-related measures as prognostic indicators for the 
progression from aMCI to AD dementia, comparing those who converted to AD with 
those who remained with a stable aMCI diagnosis during the follow-up.
METHODS: Four hundred two individuals with aMCI from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database were included. Robust linear 
mixed-effects models were used to study the impact of gait abnormalities on a 
comprehensive neuropsychological battery over 36 months while controlling for 
relevant medical variables at baseline. The impact of gait on brain measures was 
also investigated. Lastly, the Cox proportional-hazards model was used to 
explore the prognostic relevance of abnormal gait and neuropsychological 
associated tests.
RESULTS: While controlling for relevant covariates, we found that gait 
abnormalities led to a greater decline over time in attention (DSST) and global 
cognition (MMSE). Intriguingly, psychomotor speed (TMT-A) and divided attention 
(TMT-B) declined uniquely in the abnormal gait group. Conversely, specific AD 
global cognition tests (ADAS-13) and auditory-verbal memory (RAVLT immediate 
recall) declined over time independently of gait profile. All the other 
cognitive tests were not significantly affected by time or by gait profile. In 
addition, we found that ventricles size increased faster in the abnormal gait 
group compared to the normal gait group. In terms of prognosis, abnormal gait 
(HR = 1.7), MMSE (HR = 1.09), and DSST (HR = 1.03) covariates showed a higher 
impact on AD dementia conversion.
CONCLUSIONS: The importance of the link between gait and related cognitive 
functions in terms of diagnosis, prognosis, and rehabilitation in aMCI is 
critical. We showed that in aMCI gait abnormalities lead to executive 
functions/attention deterioration and conversion to AD dementia.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-023-04175-8
PMCID: PMC10388514
PMID: 37525134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


12. J Alzheimers Dis. 2022;90(1):263-270. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220397.

Mini-Mental State Examination and Montreal Cognitive Assessment as Tools for 
Following Cognitive Changes in Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
Participants.

Wang G(1), Estrella A(2), Hakim O(2), Milazzo P(2), Patel S(2), Pintagro C(2), 
Li D(3), Zhao R(4), Vance DE(5), Li W(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Health Professions, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)The College, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(5)School of Nursing, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) are two commonly used cognitive screening and diagnostic 
tools.
OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to assess their efficacy for monitoring cognitive 
changes, as well as the correlation between the two tests.
METHODS: At baseline, participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) were divided into four groups based on their cognitive 
diagnoses: healthy control (HC), early mild cognitive impairment (EMCI), late 
mild cognitive impairment (LMCI), and Alzheimer's disease (AD). MMSE or MoCA 
scores were compared among the four groups using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
model with repeated measures with post-hoc Bonferroni correction. For those 
participants who had both MMSE and MoCA assessments done, a Pearson correlation 
analysis was performed between the two assessments for each visit.
RESULTS: The MMSE scores were significantly different among the four groups at 
baseline, which was true for each of the three annual follow-up visits. By 
contrast, the MoCA scores were not significantly different between HC and EMCI 
groups at either baseline or any of the follow-up visits. For participants with 
a diagnosis of LMCI, the cognitive performance deteriorated in a linear manner 
12 months after the baseline, which was independent of MMSE or MoCA. At last, 
the MMSE scores were moderately related to MoCA scores, which got stronger along 
with the time of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: MMSE and MoCA are comparable as cognitive assessment tools to 
monitor cognitive changes. In addition, the measurements of MMSE and MoCA are 
moderately correlated for the follow-up visits.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220397
PMID: 36093696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Front Neurosci. 2022 Jan 3;15:744190. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.744190. 
eCollection 2021.

Toward a Multimodal Computer-Aided Diagnostic Tool for Alzheimer's Disease 
Conversion.

Pena D, Suescun J, Schiess M, Ellmore TM, Giancardo L; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. It is one 
of the leading sources of morbidity and mortality in the aging population AD 
cardinal symptoms include memory and executive function impairment that 
profoundly alters a patient's ability to perform activities of daily living. 
People with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) exhibit many of the early clinical 
symptoms of patients with AD and have a high chance of converting to AD in their 
lifetime. Diagnostic criteria rely on clinical assessment and brain magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). Many groups are working to help automate this process 
to improve the clinical workflow. Current computational approaches are focused 
on predicting whether or not a subject with MCI will convert to AD in the 
future. To our knowledge, limited attention has been given to the development of 
automated computer-assisted diagnosis (CAD) systems able to provide an AD 
conversion diagnosis in MCI patient cohorts followed longitudinally. This is 
important as these CAD systems could be used by primary care providers to 
monitor patients with MCI. The method outlined in this paper addresses this gap 
and presents a computationally efficient pre-processing and prediction pipeline, 
and is designed for recognizing patterns associated with AD conversion. We 
propose a new approach that leverages longitudinal data that can be easily 
acquired in a clinical setting (e.g., T1-weighted magnetic resonance images, 
cognitive tests, and demographic information) to identify the AD conversion 
point in MCI subjects with AUC = 84.7. In contrast, cognitive tests and 
demographics alone achieved AUC = 80.6, a statistically significant difference 
(n = 669, p < 0.05). We designed a convolutional neural network that is 
computationally efficient and requires only linear registration between imaging 
time points. The model architecture combines Attention and Inception 
architectures while utilizing both cross-sectional and longitudinal imaging and 
clinical information. Additionally, the top brain regions and clinical features 
that drove the model's decision were investigated. These included the thalamus, 
caudate, planum temporale, and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test. We believe 
our method could be easily translated into the healthcare setting as an 
objective AD diagnostic tool for patients with MCI.

Copyright © 2022 Pena, Suescun, Schiess, Ellmore, Giancardo and the Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.744190
PMCID: PMC8761739
PMID: 35046766

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


14. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;96(4):1739-1746. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230687.

Elevated Homocysteine Levels and Hypertension Relate to Cognitive Impairment via 
Increased White Matter Hyperintensity Volume.

Gao Y(1)(2), Duan X(2), Li W(1), Zhang X(1), Xian X(3), Zhu Y(4), Wang H(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, 
Brain Aging and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory of Hebei Province, 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(4)Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine 
Geriatrics Department, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have identified a relationship between elevated 
homocysteine levels and hypertension (HTN) with Alzheimer's disease (AD), but 
its pathogenesis remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate elevated homocysteine levels and HTN as risk factors for 
cognitive impairment (CI) and determine their relationship with white matter 
hyperintensity (WMH) volume.
METHODS: A total of 521 subjects were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database and divided into two groups according to 
the diagnostic criteria of the ADNI database. The CI group included 370 
subjects, consisting of 122 with AD and 248 with mild CI, while the cognitively 
normal (CN) group contained 151 subjects. The history of HTN, homocysteine 
levels, WMH volume and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: The study found that patients with CI had higher homocysteine levels 
than those with CN. Additionally, WMH volume was significantly correlated with 
homocysteine levels in CI patients, and MMSE scores decreased as WMH volume 
increased. Further analysis revealed that CI patients with HTN had significantly 
higher homocysteine levels than those without HTN. Furthermore, the correlation 
between WMH volume and homocysteine levels was significant only in CI patients 
with HTN and not in those without HTN. In CN patients, there was no correlation 
between WMH volume and homocysteine levels in either the HTN or non-HTN groups, 
and no difference was observed in homocysteine levels.
CONCLUSIONS: It is indicated that elevated homocysteine levels in conjunction 
with HTN are associated with the increased volume of WMHs and CI.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230687
PMID: 38007660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Nov 15;15:1285333. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1285333. 
eCollection 2023.

APOE4 allele-specific associations between diet, multimodal biomarkers, and 
cognition among Puerto Rican adults in Massachusetts.

Guan Y(#)(1), Cheng CH(#)(1), Bellomo LI(1), Narain S(1), Bigornia SJ(2), 
Garelnabi MO(3), Scott T(4), Ordovás JM(5)(6)(7), Tucker KL(8)(9), Bhadelia 
R(10), Koo BB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University Chobanian and 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Agriculture, Nutrition, and Food Systems, College of Life 
Sciences and Agriculture, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, United 
States.
(3)Department of Public Health, Zuckerberg College of Health Sciences, 
University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States.
(4)School of Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, J.M.-US Department of Agriculture Human 
Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(6)IMDEA Alimentacion, Madrid, Spain.
(7)CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y la Nutricion (CIBEROBN), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences, Zuckerberg College of 
Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States.
(9)Center for Population Health, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, 
United States.
(10)Neuroradiology Section, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Dec 12;15:1343591. doi: 
10.3389/fnagi.2023.1343591.

BACKGROUND: Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is the strongest genetic risk factor for 
sporadic Alzheimer's Disease (AD), and the ε4 allele (APOE4) may interact with 
lifestyle factors that relate to brain structural changes, underlying the 
increased risk of AD. However, the exact role of APOE4 in mediating interactions 
between the peripheral circulatory system and the central nervous system, and 
how it may link to brain and cognitive aging requires further elucidation. In 
this analysis, we investigated the association between APOE4 carrier status and 
multimodal biomarkers (diet, blood markers, clinical diagnosis, brain structure, 
and cognition) in the context of gene-environment interactions.
METHODS: Participants were older adults from a longitudinal observational study, 
the Boston Puerto Rican Health Study (BPRHS), who self-identified as of Puerto 
Rican descent. Demographics, APOE genotype, diet, blood, and clinical data were 
collected at baseline and at approximately 12th year, with the addition of 
multimodal brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (T1-weighted and diffusion) 
and cognitive testing acquired at 12-year. Measures were compared between APOE4 
carriers and non-carriers, and associations between multimodal variables were 
examined using correlation and multivariate network analyses within each group.
RESULTS: A total of 156 BPRHS participants (mean age at imaging = 68 years, 77% 
female, mean follow-up 12.7 years) with complete multimodal data were included 
in the current analysis. APOE4 carriers (n = 43) showed reduced medial temporal 
lobe (MTL) white matter (WM) microstructural integrity and lower mini-mental 
state examination (MMSE) score than non-carriers (n = 113). This pattern was 
consistent with an independent sample from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) of n = 283 non-Hispanic White adults without dementia (mean 
age = 75, 40% female). Within BPRHS, carriers showed distinct connectivity 
patterns between multimodal biomarkers, characterized by stronger direct network 
connections between baseline diet/blood markers with 12-year blood/clinical 
measures, and between blood markers (especially lipids and cytokines) and WM. 
Cardiovascular burden (i.e., hypertension and diabetes status) was associated 
with WM integrity for both carriers and non-carriers.
CONCLUSION: APOE4 carrier status affects interactions between dietary factors, 
multimodal blood biomarkers, and MTL WM integrity across ~12 years of follow-up, 
which may reflect increased peripheral-central systems crosstalk following 
blood-brain barrier breakdown in carriers.

Copyright © 2023 Guan, Cheng, Bellomo, Narain, Bigornia, Garelnabi, Scott, 
Ordovás, Tucker, Bhadelia and Koo.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1285333
PMCID: PMC10684694
PMID: 38035273

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.


16. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Oct 28:2024.10.27.24316215. doi: 
10.1101/2024.10.27.24316215.

Prediction, prognosis and monitoring of neurodegeneration at biobank-scale via 
machine learning and imaging.

Dadu A(1)(2)(3), Ta M(2)(3), Tustison NJ(4), Daneshmand A(5), Marek K(6), 
Singleton AB(2)(7), Campbell RH(1), Nalls MA(2)(3)(7), Iwaki H(2)(3)(7), Avants 
B(4)(6), Faghri F(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Champaign, IL, 61820, USA.
(2)Center for Alzheimer's and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(3)DataTecnica, Washington, DC, 20812, USA.
(4)University of Virginia, Dept of Radiology and Medical Imaging, 
Charlottesville, VA, 22903, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, 02118, USA.
(6)InviCRO LLC, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD) are the most common neurodegenerative conditions. These central 
nervous system disorders impact both the structure and function of the brain and 
may lead to imaging changes that precede symptoms. Patients with ADRD or PD have 
long asymptomatic phases that exhibit significant heterogeneity. Hence, 
quantitative measures that can provide early disease indicators are necessary to 
improve patient stratification, clinical care, and clinical trial design. This 
work uses machine learning techniques to derive such a quantitative marker from 
T1-weighted (T1w) brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
METHODS: In this retrospective study, we developed machine learning (ML) based 
disease-specific scores based on T1w brain MRI utilizing Parkinson's Disease 
Progression Marker Initiative (PPMI) and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) cohorts. We evaluated the potential of ML-based scores for 
early diagnosis, prognosis, and monitoring of ADRD and PD in an independent 
large-scale population-based longitudinal cohort, UK Biobank.
FINDINGS: 1,826 dementia images from 731 participants, 3,161 healthy control 
images from 925 participants from the ADNI cohort, 684 PD images from 319 
participants, and 232 healthy control images from 145 participants from the PPMI 
cohort were used to train machine learning models. The classification 
performance is 0.94 [95% CI: 0.93-0.96] area under the ROC Curve (AUC) for ADRD 
detection and 0.63 [95% CI: 0.57-0.71] for PD detection using 790 extracted 
structural brain features. The most predictive regions include the hippocampus 
and temporal brain regions in ADRD and the substantia nigra in PD. The 
normalized ML model's probabilistic output (ADRD and PD imaging scores) was 
evaluated on 42,835 participants with imaging data from the UK Biobank. There 
are 66 cases for ADRD and 40 PD cases whose T1 brain MRI is available during 
pre-diagnostic phases. For diagnosis occurrence events within 5 years, the 
integrated survival model achieves a time-dependent AUC of 0.86 [95% CI: 
0.80-0.92] for dementia and 0.89 [95% CI: 0.85-0.94] for PD. ADRD imaging score 
is strongly associated with dementia-free survival (hazard ratio (HR) 1.76 [95% 
CI: 1.50-2.05] per S.D. of imaging score), and PD imaging score shows 
association with PD-free survival (hazard ratio 2.33 [95% CI: 1.55-3.50]) in our 
integrated model. HR and prevalence increased stepwise over imaging score 
quartiles for PD, demonstrating heterogeneity. As a proxy for diagnosis, we 
validated AD/PD polygenic risk scores of 42,835 subjects against the imaging 
scores, showing a highly significant association after adjusting for covariates. 
In both the PPMI and ADNI cohorts, the scores are associated with clinical 
assessments, including the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog), and pathological 
markers, which include amyloid and tau. Finally, imaging scores are associated 
with polygenic risk scores for multiple diseases. Our results suggest that we 
can use imaging scores to assess the genetic architecture of such disorders in 
the future.
INTERPRETATION: Our study demonstrates the use of quantitative markers generated 
using machine learning techniques for ADRD and PD. We show that disease 
probability scores obtained from brain structural features are useful for early 
detection, prognosis prediction, and monitoring disease progression. To 
facilitate community engagement and external tests of model utility, an 
interactive app to explore summary level data from this study and dive into 
external data can be found here https://ndds-brainimaging-ml.streamlit.app. As 
far as we know, this is the first publicly available cloud-based MRI prediction 
application.
FUNDING: US National Institute on Aging, and US National Institutes of Health.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.10.27.24316215
PMCID: PMC11581077
PMID: 39574848

Conflict of interest statement: A.D., M.T., M.A.N., H.I., and F.F. declare the 
following competing financial interests, as their participation in this project 
was part of a competitive contract awarded to Data Tecnica International, LLC, 
by the NIH to support open science research. M.A.N. also currently serves on the 
scientific advisory board for Character Bio and is an advisor to Neuron23, Inc. 
B.A. are employees of REALM IDx. The study’s funders had no role in the study 
design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the 
report. All authors and the public can access all data and statistical 
programming code used in this project for the analyses and results generation. 
F.F. takes final responsibility for the decision to submit the paper for 
publication.


17. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2022 Apr 1;77(4):683-688. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glab313.

A Mixed-Effects Model of Associations Between Interleukin-6 and Hippocampal 
Volume.

Harrell ER(1), Bui C(2), Newman SD(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA.
(2)Alabama Life Research Institute, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, 
USA.

Previous studies report hippocampal volume loss can help predict conversion from 
normative aging to mild cognitive impairment to dementia. Additionally, a 
growing literature indicates that stress-related allostatic load may increase 
disease vulnerability. The current study examined the relationship between 
stress-related cytokines (ie, interleukin-6 [IL-6]), cognition as measured by 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores, and hippocampal volume. Mixed 
models were employed to examine both within- (across time) and between-subject 
effects of IL-6 and hippocampal volume on MMSE score among 566 participants from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). The within-subject 
analysis found left hippocampal volume significantly (p = .009) predicted MMSE 
score. Between-subject analysis found the effect of IL-6 on MMSE was moderated 
by right hippocampal volume (p = .001). These results replicate previous 
findings and also extend prior work demonstrating stress-related cytokines may 
play a role in Alzheimer's disease progression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glab313
PMCID: PMC8974327
PMID: 34637514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2023 Feb 24;78(2):206-212. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glac217.

The Mediating Role of Inflammation in the Relationship Between α-Synuclein and 
Cognitive Functioning.

Dabiri S(1), Ramírez Ruiz MI(1), Jean-Louis G(2), Ntekim OE(3), Obisesan TO(4), 
Campbell AL(1), Mwendwa DT(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Howard University, Washington, District of 
Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Graduate Nutritional Sciences, Howard University, Washington, 
District of Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, Howard University Hospital, 
Washington, District of Columbia, Washington, DC, USA.

Accumulating evidence suggests that α-synuclein plays a role in the 
pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study examined whether 
α-synuclein level in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was associated with cognitive 
functioning among older adults. We also explored whether this relationship was 
mediated by proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6, along with sIL-6R and 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Using a cross-sectional Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; N = 148) sample, we examined the 
relationship between α-synuclein and participants' performance on Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale Cognitive 
Subscale (ADAS-Cog 13) at baseline. Mediation analyses were utilized, adjusting 
for age, education, APOEe4, and Geriatric Depression Scale scores. All 
biological markers were measured in CSF. Participants in the current sample were 
58.3% males, 41.7% females, and Caucasian (95.5%); their average education and 
age were 15.5 (standard deviation [SD] = 2.97) and 74.4 (SD = 7.51) years, 
respectively. Higher accumulation of α-synuclein was associated with poorer MMSE 
scores (β = -0.41, standard error [SE] = 1.54, p < .001). This relationship 
appeared to be mediated by VEGF (β = 0.27, SE = 2.15, p = .025) and IL-6r 
(β = 0.22, SE = 1.66, p < .026). In addition, α-synuclein was associated with 
poorer performance on the ADAS-Cog 13 (β = 0.34, p = .005) and mediated by VEGF 
(β = -0.19, SE = 4.13, p = .025) after adjusting for age, education, APOEe4, and 
depressive symptoms. α-Synuclein may serve as an additional biomarker for 
determining poor cognitive functioning. VEGF and IL-6 soluble receptors were 
significant mediators of the relationship between α-synuclein and cognitive 
functioning. If confirmed in prospective analyses, these findings can further 
inform the pathologic cascade and early diagnosis of AD.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glac217
PMCID: PMC10215981
PMID: 36269624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


19. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2015 Jul;21(6):455-67. doi: 10.1017/S1355617715000430.

Associations between Verbal Learning Slope and Neuroimaging Markers across the 
Cognitive Aging Spectrum.

Gifford KA(1), Phillips JS(1), Samuels LR(1), Lane EM(1), Bell SP(1), Liu D(1), 
Hohman TJ(1), Romano RR 3rd(1), Fritzsche LR(1), Lu Z(2), Jefferson AL(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, 
Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag 
H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman 
D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, 
Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, Creech ML, Franklin 
E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Geldmacher 
D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Shah RC, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec DM, 
Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, Borges 
S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, Smith CD, 
Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard 
RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, 
Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, 
Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Finger E, 
Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, 
Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, 
Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall 
G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, 
Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, 
Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, 
Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen 
D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka 
M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson 
GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, 
Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer 
K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin 
N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, Aisen P, 
Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris 
JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, 
Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Gessert D, 
Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, Harvey D, 
Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, 
Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, Morris JC, 
Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, 
Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim 
S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, 
Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, Mintzer J, 
Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, 
Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling J, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, 
Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)1Vanderbilt Memory & Alzheimer's Center,Department of Neurology,Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center,Nashville,Tennessee.
(2)2Department of Biostatistics,Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center,Nashville,Tennessee.

A symptom of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a 
flat learning profile. Learning slope calculation methods vary, and the optimal 
method for capturing neuroanatomical changes associated with MCI and early AD 
pathology is unclear. This study cross-sectionally compared four different 
learning slope measures from the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (simple 
slope, regression-based slope, two-slope method, peak slope) to structural 
neuroimaging markers of early AD neurodegeneration (hippocampal volume, cortical 
thickness in parahippocampal gyrus, precuneus, and lateral prefrontal cortex) 
across the cognitive aging spectrum [normal control (NC); (n=198; age=76±5), MCI 
(n=370; age=75±7), and AD (n=171; age=76±7)] in ADNI. Within diagnostic group, 
general linear models related slope methods individually to neuroimaging 
variables, adjusting for age, sex, education, and APOE4 status. Among MCI, 
better learning performance on simple slope, regression-based slope, and late 
slope (Trial 2-5) from the two-slope method related to larger parahippocampal 
thickness (all p-values<.01) and hippocampal volume (p<.01). Better 
regression-based slope (p<.01) and late slope (p<.01) were related to larger 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in MCI. No significant associations emerged 
between any slope and neuroimaging variables for NC (p-values ≥.05) or AD 
(p-values ≥.02). Better learning performances related to larger medial temporal 
lobe (i.e., hippocampal volume, parahippocampal gyrus thickness) and 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in MCI only. Regression-based and late slope 
were most highly correlated with neuroimaging markers and explained more 
variance above and beyond other common memory indices, such as total learning. 
Simple slope may offer an acceptable alternative given its ease of calculation.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617715000430
PMCID: PMC4657447
PMID: 26219209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neuroradiology. 2022 Feb;64(2):279-288. doi: 10.1007/s00234-021-02767-y. Epub 
2021 Jul 11.

Right entorhinal cortical thickness is associated with Mini-Mental State 
Examination scores from multi-country datasets using MRI.

Yamashita K(1), Kuwashiro T(2), Ishikawa K(3), Furuya K(4), Harada S(4), Shin 
S(4), Wada N(4), Hirakawa C(5), Okada Y(2), Noguchi T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan. yamakou@radiol.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Cerebrovascular Medicine and Neurology, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Radiology, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, 810-0065, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Technology, Division of Radiology, National Hospital 
Organization Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyohama, Chuo-ku, Fukuoka, 810-0065, 
Japan.

PURPOSE: To discover common biomarkers correlating with the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores from multi-country MRI datasets.
METHODS: The first dataset comprised 112 subjects (49 men, 63 women; range, 
46-94 years) at the National Hospital Organization Kyushu Medical Center. A 
second dataset comprised 300 subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database (177 men, 123 women; range, 57-91 years). 
Three-dimensional T1-weighted MR images were collected from both datasets. In 
total, 14 deep gray matter volumes and 70 cortical thicknesses were obtained 
from MR images using FreeSurfer software. Total hippocampal volume and the ratio 
of hippocampus to cerebral volume were also calculated. Correlations between 
each variable and MMSE scores were assessed using Pearson's correlation 
coefficient. Parameters with moderate correlation coefficients (r > 0.3) from 
each dataset were determined as independent variables and evaluated using 
general linear model (GLM) analyses.
RESULTS: In Pearson's correlation coefficient, total and bilateral hippocampal 
volumes, right amygdala volume, and right entorhinal cortex (ERC) thickness 
showed moderate correlation coefficients (r > 0.3) with MMSE scores from the 
first dataset. The ADNI dataset showed moderate correlations with MMSE scores in 
more variables, including bilateral ERC thickness and hippocampal volume. GLM 
analysis revealed that right ERC thickness correlated significantly with MMSE 
score in both datasets. Cortical thicknesses of the left parahippocampal gyrus, 
left inferior parietal lobe, and right fusiform gyrus also significantly 
correlated with MMSE score in the ADNI dataset (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: A positive correlation between right ERC thickness and MMSE score 
was identified from multi-country datasets.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00234-021-02767-y
PMID: 34247261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2023 Dec;38(12):e6037. doi: 10.1002/gps.6037.

Racial differences in the effect of APOE-ε4 genotypes on trail making test B in 
Alzheimer's disease: A longitudinal study.

Xu C(1), Acevedo P(1), Lu Y(2), Su BB(3), Ozuna K(1), Padilla V(1), Karithara 
A(1), Mao C(1), Navia RO(4), Piamjariyakul U(5), Wang K(5); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics - Allergy and Immunology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine and Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.
(5)School of Nursing, Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The trail making test part B (TMT-B) evaluates executive functions, 
memory, and sensorimotor functions. No previous study was found to examine the 
longitudinal effect of APOE-ε4 genotypes on the TMT-B scores in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) across racial groups.
METHODS: This study used the data from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI): 382 participants with AD, 503 with cognitive normal (CN), 
1293 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at baseline and follow-up of four 
years. The multivariable linear mixed model was used to investigate the effect 
of APOE-ε4 genotypes on changes in TMT-B scores.
RESULTS: Compared with Whites, African Americans (AA) and Hispanics had higher 
TMT-B scores (poor cognitive function). Furthermore, Whites subjects with 1 or 2 
APOE-ε4 alleles had significantly higher TMT-B scores compared with individuals 
without APOE-ε4 allele at baseline and four follow-up visits; however, no 
differences in TMT-B were found between APOE-ε4 alleles in the Hispanic and AA 
groups. No APOE-ε4 by visit interactions was found for 3 racial groups. 
Stratified by AD diagnosis, the APOE-ε4 allele was associated with TMT-B scores 
only in the MCI group, while there were significant interactions for visit by 
education, APOE-ε4 allele, and the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score in 
the MCI group. In addition, TMT-B was significantly correlated with the MMSE, AD 
Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 (ADAS13), tTau, pTau, Aβ42, and 
hippocampus.
CONCLUSIONS: APOE-ɛ4 allele is associated with TMT-B scores in Whites subjects, 
but not in the Hispanic and AA groups. APOE-ε4 showed interaction with visit in 
the MCI group.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.6037
PMID: 38100638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2023 Jan;10(1):18-31. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51695. Epub 2022 
Dec 14.

Plasma phosphorylated tau181 predicts cognitive and functional decline.

Tropea TF(1), Waligorska T(2), Xie SX(3), Nasrallah IM(4), Cousins KAQ(1), 
Trojanowski JQ(2), Grossman M(1), Irwin DJ(1), Weintraub D(5)(6), Lee EB(2), 
Wolk DA(1), Chen-Plotkin AS(1), Shaw LM(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education and Clinical Center (PADRECC), 
Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if plasma tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (p-tau181) 
distinguishes pathology-confirmed Alzheimer's disease (AD) from normal cognition 
(NC) adults, to test if p-tau181 predicts cognitive and functional decline, and 
to validate findings in an external cohort.
METHODS: Thirty-one neuropathology-confirmed AD cases, participants with 
clinical diagnoses of mild cognitive impairment (MCI, N = 91) or AD dementia 
(N = 64), and NC (N = 241) had plasma collected at study entry. The clinical 
diagnosis groups had annual cognitive (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE) and 
functional (Clinical Dementia Rating Scale, CDR) measures. NC (N = 70), MCI 
(N = 75), and AD dementia (N = 50) cases from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were used as a validation cohort. Plasma p-tau181 
was measured using the Quanterix SiMoA HD-X platform.
RESULTS: Plasma p-tau181 differentiated pathology-confirmed AD from NC with 
negative amyloid PET scans with an AUC of 0.93. A cut point of 3.44 pg/mL 
(maximum Youden Index) had a sensitivity of 0.77, specificity of 0.96. p-Tau181 
values above the cut point were associated with the faster rate of decline in 
MMSE in AD dementia and MCI and a shorter time to a clinically significant 
functional decline in all groups. In a subset of MCI cases from ADNI, p-tau181 
values above the cut point associated with faster rate of decline in MMSE, and a 
shorter time to a clinically significant functional decline and conversion to 
dementia.
INTERPRETATION: Plasma p-tau181 differentiates AD pathology cases from NC with 
high accuracy. Higher levels of plasma p-tau181 are associated with faster 
cognitive and functional decline.

© 2022 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51695
PMCID: PMC9852389
PMID: 36518085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.


23. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2024 Sep;30(9):e70051. doi: 10.1111/cns.70051.

A prediction model of dementia conversion for mild cognitive impairment by 
combining plasma pTau181 and structural imaging features.

Li TR(1), Li BL(2)(3), Zhong J(1), Xu XR(1), Wang TS(1)(4), Liu FQ(1)(2); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(3)Beijing Children's Hospital, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Capital 
Medical University, National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Yangzhou Friendship Hospital, Yangzhou, China.

AIMS: The early stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are no longer insurmountable. 
Therefore, identifying at-risk individuals is of great importance for precise 
treatment. We developed a model to predict cognitive deterioration in patients 
with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Based on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database, we constructed models in a derivation cohort of 761 participants with 
MCI (138 of whom developed dementia at the 36th month) and verified them in a 
validation cohort of 353 cognitively normal controls (54 developed MCI and 19 
developed dementia at the 36th month). In addition, 1303 participants with 
available AD cerebrospinal fluid core biomarkers were selected to clarify the 
ability of the model to predict AD core features. We assessed 32 parameters as 
candidate predictors, including clinical information, blood biomarkers, and 
structural imaging features, and used multivariable logistic regression analysis 
to develop our prediction model.
RESULTS: Six independent variables of MCI deterioration were identified: 
apolipoprotein E ε4 allele status, lower Mini-Mental State Examination scores, 
higher levels of plasma pTau181, smaller volumes of the left hippocampus and 
right amygdala, and a thinner right inferior temporal cortex. We established an 
easy-to-use risk heat map and risk score based on these risk factors. The area 
under the curve (AUC) for both internal and external validations was close to 
0.850. Furthermore, the AUC was above 0.800 in identifying participants with 
high brain amyloid-β loads. Calibration plots demonstrated good agreement 
between the predicted probability and actual observations in the internal and 
external validations.
CONCLUSION: We developed and validated an accurate prediction model for dementia 
conversion in patients with MCI. Simultaneously, the model predicts AD-specific 
pathological changes. We hope that this model will contribute to more precise 
clinical treatment and better healthcare resource allocation.

© 2024 The Author(s). CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.70051
PMCID: PMC11410557
PMID: 39294845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding 
author confirms no conflict of interest. All authors agreed to the publication 
of the manuscript in its current form.


24. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 5;11(1):3254. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-74399-w.

Multimodal deep learning models for early detection of Alzheimer's disease 
stage.

Venugopalan J(1), Tong L(1), Hassanzadeh HR(2), Wang MD(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and 
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. maywang@gatech.edu.
(4)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. maywang@gatech.edu.
(5)Winship Cancer Institute, Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and 
Biosciences, Institute of People and Technology, Georgia Institute of Technology 
and Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. maywang@gatech.edu.

Most current Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive disorders (MCI) studies 
use single data modality to make predictions such as AD stages. The fusion of 
multiple data modalities can provide a holistic view of AD staging analysis. 
Thus, we use deep learning (DL) to integrally analyze imaging (magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI)), genetic (single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)), and 
clinical test data to classify patients into AD, MCI, and controls (CN). We use 
stacked denoising auto-encoders to extract features from clinical and genetic 
data, and use 3D-convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for imaging data. We also 
develop a novel data interpretation method to identify top-performing features 
learned by the deep-models with clustering and perturbation analysis. Using 
Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) dataset, we demonstrate that 
deep models outperform shallow models, including support vector machines, 
decision trees, random forests, and k-nearest neighbors. In addition, we 
demonstrate that integrating multi-modality data outperforms single modality 
models in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and meanF1 scores. Our models 
have identified hippocampus, amygdala brain areas, and the Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test (RAVLT) as top distinguished features, which are consistent with 
the known AD literature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-74399-w
PMCID: PMC7864942
PMID: 33547343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


25. Neuroimage. 2018 Nov 1;181:521-538. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.07.032. Epub 
2018 Jul 23.

Reconstructing subject-specific effect maps.

Konukoglu E(1), Glocker B(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
ender.konukoglu@vision.ee.ethz.ch.
(2)Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: b.glocker@imperial.ac.uk.

Predictive models allow subject-specific inference when analyzing disease 
related alterations in neuroimaging data. Given a subject's data, inference can 
be made at two levels: global, i.e. identifiying condition presence for the 
subject, and local, i.e. detecting condition effect on each individual 
measurement extracted from the subject's data. While global inference is widely 
used, local inference, which can be used to form subject-specific effect maps, 
is rarely used because existing models often yield noisy detections composed of 
dispersed isolated islands. In this article, we propose a reconstruction method, 
named RSM, to improve subject-specific detections of predictive modeling 
approaches and in particular, binary classifiers. RSM specifically aims to 
reduce noise due to sampling error associated with using a finite sample of 
examples to train classifiers. The proposed method is a wrapper-type algorithm 
that can be used with different binary classifiers in a diagnostic manner, i.e. 
without information on condition presence. Reconstruction is posed as a 
Maximum-A-Posteriori problem with a prior model whose parameters are estimated 
from training data in a classifier-specific fashion. Experimental evaluation is 
performed on synthetically generated data and data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Results on synthetic data demonstrate 
that using RSM yields higher detection accuracy compared to using models 
directly or with bootstrap averaging. Analyses on the ADNI dataset show that RSM 
can also improve correlation between subject-specific detections in cortical 
thickness data and non-imaging markers of Alzheimer's Disease (AD), such as the 
Mini Mental State Examination Score and Cerebrospinal Fluid amyloid-β levels. 
Further reliability studies on the longitudinal ADNI dataset show improvement on 
detection reliability when RSM is used.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.07.032
PMID: 30048747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Front Big Data. 2021 May 20;4:661110. doi: 10.3389/fdata.2021.661110. 
eCollection 2021.

Inter-Cohort Validation of SuStaIn Model for Alzheimer's Disease.

Archetti D(1), Young AL(2)(3), Oxtoby NP(3), Ferreira D(4)(5), Mårtensson G(4), 
Westman E(4), Alexander DC(3), Frisoni GB(6)(7), Redolfi A(1); for Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative and EuroPOND Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroinformatics, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Computer Science, UCL Centre for Medical Image Computing, 
London, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Center for Alzheimer Research, Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(6)Memory Clinic and LANVIE - Laboratory of Neuroimaging of Aging, University 
Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(7)Laboratory of Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology - LANE, IRCCS 
Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder which spans several 
years from preclinical manifestations to dementia. In recent years, interest in 
the application of machine learning (ML) algorithms to personalized medicine has 
grown considerably, and a major challenge that such models face is the 
transferability from the research settings to clinical practice. The objective 
of this work was to demonstrate the transferability of the Subtype and Stage 
Inference (SuStaIn) model from well-characterized research data set, employed as 
training set, to independent less-structured and heterogeneous test sets 
representative of the clinical setting. The training set was composed of MRI 
data of 1043 subjects from the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), and the test set was composed of data from 767 subjects from OASIS, 
Pharma-Cog, and ViTA clinical datasets. Both sets included subjects covering the 
entire spectrum of AD, and for both sets volumes of relevant brain regions were 
derived from T1-3D MRI scans processed with Freesurfer v5.3 cross-sectional 
stream. In order to assess the predictive value of the model, subpopulations of 
subjects with stable mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and MCIs that progressed to 
AD dementia (pMCI) were identified in both sets. SuStaIn identified three 
disease subtypes, of which the most prevalent corresponded to the typical 
atrophy pattern of AD. The other SuStaIn subtypes exhibited similarities with 
the previously defined hippocampal sparing and limbic predominant atrophy 
patterns of AD. Subject subtyping proved to be consistent in time for all 
cohorts and the staging provided by the model was correlated with cognitive 
performance. Classification of subjects on the basis of a combination of SuStaIn 
subtype and stage, mini mental state examination and amyloid-β1-42 cerebrospinal 
fluid concentration was proven to predict conversion from MCI to AD dementia on 
par with other novel statistical algorithms, with ROC curves that were not 
statistically different for the training and test sets and with area under curve 
respectively equal to 0.77 and 0.76. This study proves the transferability of a 
SuStaIn model for AD from research data to less-structured clinical cohorts, and 
indicates transferability to the clinical setting.

Copyright © 2021 Archetti, Young, Oxtoby, Ferreira, Mårtensson, Westman, 
Alexander, Frisoni and Redolfi.

DOI: 10.3389/fdata.2021.661110
PMCID: PMC8173213
PMID: 34095821

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


27. Neurology. 2022 Sep 27;99(13):e1402-e1413. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200898. 
Epub 2022 Jul 6.

Association of Pace of Aging Measured by Blood-Based DNA Methylation With 
Age-Related Cognitive Impairment and Dementia.

Sugden K(1), Caspi A(2), Elliott ML(2), Bourassa KJ(2), Chamarti K(2), Corcoran 
DL(2), Hariri AR(2), Houts RM(2), Kothari M(2), Kritchevsky S(2), Kuchel GA(2), 
Mill JS(2), Williams BS(2), Belsky DW(2), Moffitt TE(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative*.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience (K.S., A.C., M.L.E., K.C., 
A.R.H., R.M.H., B.S.W., T.E.M.), and Center for Genomic and Computational 
Biology (K.S., A.C., B.S.W., T.E.M.), Duke University, Durham, NC; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (A.C., T.E.M.), Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC; Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre (A.C, 
T.E.M.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, UK. Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development (K.J.B.), Duke 
University, Durham, NC; Department of Genetics (D.L.C.), University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill; Butler Columbia Aging Center (M.K., 
D.W.B.), Columbia University, New York, New York; Sticht Center for Healthy 
Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention (S.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC; UConn Center on Aging (G.A.K.), University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA; College of Medicine and Health (J.S.M.), 
University of Exeter Medical School, Devon, UK; and Department of Epidemiology 
(D.W.B.), Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New 
York. karen.sugden@duke.edu.
(2)From the Department of Psychology and Neuroscience (K.S., A.C., M.L.E., K.C., 
A.R.H., R.M.H., B.S.W., T.E.M.), and Center for Genomic and Computational 
Biology (K.S., A.C., B.S.W., T.E.M.), Duke University, Durham, NC; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences (A.C., T.E.M.), Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, NC; Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Centre (A.C, 
T.E.M.), Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, UK. Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development (K.J.B.), Duke 
University, Durham, NC; Department of Genetics (D.L.C.), University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill; Butler Columbia Aging Center (M.K., 
D.W.B.), Columbia University, New York, New York; Sticht Center for Healthy 
Aging and Alzheimer's Prevention (S.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC; UConn Center on Aging (G.A.K.), University of Connecticut, 
Farmington, Connecticut, USA; College of Medicine and Health (J.S.M.), 
University of Exeter Medical School, Devon, UK; and Department of Epidemiology 
(D.W.B.), Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, New 
York.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: DNA methylation algorithms are increasingly used to 
estimate biological aging; however, how these proposed measures of 
whole-organism biological aging relate to aging in the brain is not known. We 
used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the 
Framingham Heart Study (FHS) Offspring Cohort to test the association between 
blood-based DNA methylation measures of biological aging and cognitive 
impairment and dementia in older adults.
METHODS: We tested 3 "generations" of DNA methylation age algorithms (first 
generation: Horvath and Hannum clocks; second generation: PhenoAge and GrimAge; 
and third generation: DunedinPACE, Dunedin Pace of Aging Calculated from the 
Epigenome) against the following measures of cognitive impairment in ADNI: 
clinical diagnosis of dementia and mild cognitive impairment, scores on 
Alzheimer disease (AD) / Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD) 
screening tests (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, Mini-Mental State 
Examination, and Montreal Cognitive Assessment), and scores on cognitive tests 
(Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Logical Memory test, and Trail Making Test). 
In an independent replication in the FHS Offspring Cohort, we further tested the 
longitudinal association between the DNA methylation algorithms and the risk of 
developing dementia.
RESULTS: In ADNI (N = 649 individuals), the first-generation (Horvath and Hannum 
DNA methylation age clocks) and the second-generation (PhenoAge and GrimAge) DNA 
methylation measures of aging were not consistently associated with measures of 
cognitive impairment in older adults. By contrast, a third-generation measure of 
biological aging, DunedinPACE, was associated with clinical diagnosis of 
Alzheimer disease (beta [95% CI] = 0.28 [0.08-0.47]), poorer scores on Alzheimer 
disease/ADRD screening tests (beta [Robust SE] = -0.10 [0.04] to 0.08[0.04]), 
and cognitive tests (beta [Robust SE] = -0.12 [0.04] to 0.10 [0.03]). The 
association between faster pace of aging, as measured by DunedinPACE, and risk 
of developing dementia was confirmed in a longitudinal analysis of the FHS 
Offspring Cohort (N = 2,264 individuals, hazard ratio [95% CI] = 1.27 
[1.07-1.49]).
DISCUSSION: Third-generation blood-based DNA methylation measures of aging could 
prove valuable for measuring differences between individuals in the rate at 
which they age and in their risk for cognitive decline, and for evaluating 
interventions to slow aging.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200898
PMCID: PMC9576288
PMID: 35794023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2022 Nov 19;15:17562864221138154. doi: 
10.1177/17562864221138154. eCollection 2022.

Functional MRI and ApoE4 genotype for predicting cognitive decline in 
amyloid-positive individuals.

Zhu JD(1), Huang CW(2), Chang HI(2), Tsai SJ(1)(3)(4), Huang SH(5), Hsu SW(6), 
Lee CC(6), Chen HJ(5), Chang CC(7), Yang AC(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Brain Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Cognition and Aging Center, Institute for 
Translational Research in Biomedicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of NeuroRadiology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(7)Cognition and Aging Center, Institute for Translational Research in 
Biomedicine, Department of Neurology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, No. 123 Ta-Pei Road, Niau-Sung 
District, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Brain Science/Digital Medicine and Smart Healthcare Research 
Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, No. 155, Sec. 2, Linong 
Street, Beitou District, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: In light of advancements in machine learning techniques, many 
studies have implemented machine learning approaches combined with data measures 
to predict and classify Alzheimer's disease. Studies that predicted cognitive 
status with longitudinal follow-up of amyloid-positive individuals remain 
scarce, however.
OBJECTIVE: We developed models based on voxel-wise functional connectivity (FC) 
density mapping and the presence of the ApoE4 genotype to predict whether 
amyloid-positive individuals would experience cognitive decline after 1 year.
METHODS: We divided 122 participants into cognitive decline and stable cognition 
groups based on the participants' change rates in Mini-Mental State Examination 
scores. In addition, we included 68 participants from Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database as an external validation data set. 
Subsequently, we developed two classification models: the first model included 
99 voxels, and the second model included 99 voxels and the ApoE4 genotype as 
features to train the models by Wide Neural Network algorithm with fivefold 
cross-validation and to predict the classes in the hold-out test and ADNI data 
sets.
RESULTS: The results revealed that both models demonstrated high accuracy in 
classifying the two groups in the hold-out test data set. The model for FC 
demonstrated good performance, with a mean F 1-score of 0.86. The model for FC 
combined with the ApoE4 genotype achieved superior performance, with a mean F 
1-score of 0.90. In the ADNI data set, the two models demonstrated stable 
performances, with mean F 1-scores of 0.77 in the first and second models.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the proposed models exhibited promising 
accuracy for predicting cognitive status after 1 year in amyloid-positive 
individuals. Notably, the combination of FC and the ApoE4 genotype increased 
prediction accuracy. These findings can assist clinicians in predicting changes 
in cognitive status in individuals with a high risk of Alzheimer's disease and 
can assist future studies in developing precise treatment and prevention 
strategies.

© The Author(s), 2022.

DOI: 10.1177/17562864221138154
PMCID: PMC9677312
PMID: 36419870

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


29. Cells. 2022 Dec 21;12(1):13. doi: 10.3390/cells12010013.

Association of CSF GAP-43 and APOE ε4 with Cognition in Mild Cognitive 
Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Zhu Y(1), Guo X(2), Zhu F(1), Zhang Q(1)(3), Yang Y(1)(3), For The Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou 
310012, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment of Aging and Physic-Chemical Injury 
Diseases of Zhejiang Province, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.

The growth-associated protein 43 (GAP-43) is a presynaptic phosphoprotein in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE) is an 
important genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We aimed to evaluate 
the association of CSF GAP-43 with cognition and whether this correlation was 
related to the APOE ε4 status. We recruited participants from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, and they were divided into 
cognitively normal (CN) ε4 negative (CN ε4-), CN ε4 positive (CN ε4+), mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) ε4 negative (MCI ε4-), MCI ε4 positive (MCI ε4+), AD 
ε4 negative (AD ε4-), and AD ε4 positive (AD ε4+) groups. Spearman's correlation 
was utilized to evaluate the relationship between CSF GAP-43 and core AD 
biomarkers at the baseline. We performed receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve analyses to investigate the diagnostic accuracy of CSF GAP-43. The 
correlations between CSF GAP-43 and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scores and brain atrophy at baseline were assessed by using multiple linear 
regression, while the association between CSF GAP-43 and MMSE scores at the 
follow-up was tested by performing the generalized estimating equation (GEE). 
The role of CSF GAP-43 in the conversion from MCI to AD was evaluated using the 
Cox proportional hazard model. We found that the CSF GAP-43 level was 
significantly increased in MCI ε4+, AD ε4- and AD ε4+ groups compared with CN 
ε4- or MCI ε4- group. The negative associations between the CSF GAP-43 and MMSE 
scores at the baseline and follow-up were found in MCI ε4- and MCI ε4+ groups. 
In addition, baseline CSF GAP-43 was able to predict the clinical progression 
from MCI to AD. CSF GAP-43 may be a promising biomarker to screen cognition for 
AD. The effects of CSF GAP-43 on cognition were suspected to be relevant to APOE 
ε4 status.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12010013
PMCID: PMC9818551
PMID: 36611808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


30. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2021 Jul;36(7):1050-1058. doi: 10.1002/gps.5530. Epub 
2021 Mar 15.

Affective symptoms and regional cerebral tau burden in early-stage Alzheimer's 
disease.

Tommasi NS(1)(2), Gonzalez C(1)(2)(3), Briggs D(1)(2)(3), Properzi MJ(3), 
Gatchel JR(4)(5), Marshall GA(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are often present in individuals with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia. NPS are 
associated with structural and functional changes in the brain such as atrophy, 
regional hypometabolism, and hypoperfusion, considered proxies of 
neurodegeneration. Our objective was to evaluate the association between NPS and 
regional cerebral tau burden, a more direct representation of neurodegeneration, 
in cognitively normal (CN), MCI, and AD dementia individuals.
METHODS: Cross-sectional NPS were assessed using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
(NPI) in 410 CN, 199 MCI, and 61 AD dementia participants who underwent 
flortaucipir tau positron emission tomography as part of the AD Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Total NPI score and two factors of NPS (affective and 
hyperactive) were used in analyses. Linear regression models with backward 
elimination were employed with NPI as dependent variable and regional tau or 
tau-amyloid interaction as predictor of interest. Covariates included education, 
age, sex, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test Total Learning, and Trail Making 
Test B.
RESULTS: There were significant associations (p < 0.05) between the NPI 
variables (total score, Affective factor) and entorhinal and precuneus tau 
across all participants. These associations were also significant for the 
tau-amyloid interaction. These effects were significant in cognitively 
symptomatic participants (MCI and AD dementia), but not in CN participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased tau burden in the entorhinal and precuneus cortices was 
modestly associated with greater NPS in MCI and AD dementia. Further evaluation 
of NPS and their effect on early-stage AD could aid in finding new interventions 
and slowing disease progression.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.5530
PMCID: PMC8187284
PMID: 33682933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Neurology. 2022 Apr 12;98(15):e1534-e1544. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200120. 
Epub 2022 Mar 30.

Association of Diabetes and Hypertension With Brain Structural Integrity and 
Cognition in the Boston Puerto Rican Health Study Cohort.

Guan Y(1), Ebrahimzadeh SA(1), Cheng CH(1), Chen W(1), Leung T(1), Bigornia 
S(1), Palacios N(1), Garelnabi MO(1), Scott T(1), Bhadelia R(1), Tucker KL(1), 
Koo BB(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology (Y.G., C.-h.C., W.C., T.L., 
B.-B.K.), Boston University School of Medicine; Department of Radiology (S.A.E., 
R.B.), Neuroradiology Section, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA; Department of Agriculture, Nutrition, and Food 
Systems (S.B.), College of Life Sciences and Agriculture, University of New 
Hampshire, Durham; Departments of Public Health (N.P., M.O.G.) and Biomedical 
and Nutritional Sciences (K.L.T.), Zuckerberg College of Health Sciences, and 
Center for Population Health (N.P., K.L.T.), University of Massachusetts Lowell; 
and School of Medicine (T.S.), Tufts University, Boston, MA.

Erratum in
    Neurology. 2024 Mar 12;102(5):e209158. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000209158.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2022 Apr 12;98(15):609-610. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200232.
    Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):163. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206740.
    Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):164. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206741.
    Neurology. 2023 Jan 17;100(3):164-165. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000206742.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The Boston Puerto Rican Health Study (BPRHS) is a 
longitudinal study following self-identified Puerto Rican older adults living in 
the Greater Boston area. Studies have shown higher prevalence of hypertension 
(HTN) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) within this ethnic group compared to age-matched 
non-Hispanic White adults. In this study, we investigated the associations of 
HTN and T2D comorbidity on brain structural integrity and cognitive capacity in 
community-dwelling Puerto Rican adults and compared these measures with older 
adult participants (non-Hispanic White and Hispanic) from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and National Alzheimer's Coordinating 
Center (NACC) databases.
METHODS: BPRHS participants who underwent brain MRI and cognitive testing were 
divided into 4 groups based on their HTN and T2D status: HTN-/T2D-, HTN+/T2D-, 
HTN-/T2D+, and HTN+/T2D+. We assessed microstructural integrity of white matter 
(WM) pathways using diffusion MRI, brain macrostructural integrity using 
hippocampal volumes, and brain age using T1-weighted MRI and cognitive test 
scores. BPRHS results were then compared with results from non-Hispanic White 
and Hispanic participants from the ADNI and NACC databases.
RESULTS: The prevalence of HTN was almost 2 times (66.7% vs 38.7%) and of T2D 
was 5 times (31.8% vs 6.6.%) higher in BPRHS than in ADNI non-Hispanic White 
participants. Diffusion MRI showed clear deterioration patterns in major WM 
tracts in the HTN+/T2D+ group and, to a lesser extent, in the HTN+/T2D- group 
compared to the HTN-/T2D- group. HTN+/T2D+ participants also had the smallest 
hippocampal volume and larger brain aging deviations. Trends toward lower 
executive function and global cognitive scores were observed in HTN+/T2D+ 
relative to HTN-/T2D- individuals. MRI measures and the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores from the HTN+/T2D+ BPRHS group resembled those of ADNI 
White participants with progressive mild cognitive impairment (MCI), while the 
BPRHS HTN-/T2D- participants resembled participants with stable MCI. The BPRHS 
was not significantly different from the ADNI + NACC Hispanic cohort on imaging 
or MMSE measures.
DISCUSSION: The effects of T2D and HTN comorbidity led to greater brain 
structural disruptions than HTN alone. The high prevalence of HTN and T2D in the 
Puerto Rican population may be a key factor contributing to health disparities 
in cognitive impairment in this group compared to non-Hispanic White adults in 
the same age range.
TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01231958.

© 2022 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000200120
PMCID: PMC9012269
PMID: 35354581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Heliyon. 2023 Nov 4;9(11):e21626. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e21626. 
eCollection 2023 Nov.

Application of machine learning in dementia diagnosis: A systematic literature 
review.

Kantayeva G(1), Lima J(1), Pereira AI(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre in Digitalization and Intelligent Robotics (CeDRI), Instituto 
Politecnico de Bragança, Bragança, Portugal.

According to the World Health Organization forecast, over 55 million people 
worldwide have dementia, and about 10 million new cases are detected yearly. 
Early diagnosis is essential for patients to plan for the future and deal with 
the disease. Machine Learning algorithms allow us to solve the problems 
associated with early disease detection. This work attempts to identify the 
current relevance of the application of machine learning in dementia prediction 
in the scientific world and suggests open fields for future research. The 
literature review was conducted by combining bibliometric and content analysis 
of articles originating in a period of 20 years in the Scopus database. 
Twenty-seven thousand five hundred twenty papers were identified firstly, of 
which a limited number focused on machine learning in dementia diagnosis. After 
the exclusion process, 202 were selected, and 25 were chosen for analysis. The 
recent increasing interest in the past five years in the theme of machine 
learning in dementia shows that it is a relevant field for research with still 
open questions. The methods used to identify dementia or what features are used 
to identify or predict this disease are explored in this study. The literature 
review revealed that most studies used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and its 
types as the main feature, accompanied by demographic data such as age, gender, 
and the mini-mental state examination score (MMSE). Data are usually acquired 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Classification of 
Alzheimer's disease is more prevalent than prediction of Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) or their combination. The authors preferred machine learning 
algorithms such as SVM, Ensemble methods, and CNN because of their excellent 
performance and results in previous studies. However, most use not one 
machine-learning technique but a combination of techniques. Despite achieving 
good results in the studies considered, there are new concepts for future 
investigation declared by the authors and suggestions for improvements by 
employing promising methods with potentially significant results.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e21626
PMCID: PMC10663815
PMID: 38027622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


33. Brain Behav. 2024 Jul;14(7):e3611. doi: 10.1002/brb3.3611.

Choroid plexus volumes and auditory verbal learning scores are associated with 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Pearson MJ(1), Wagstaff R(1), Williams RJ(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Northern Territory, 
Australia.

PURPOSE: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) can be the prodromal phase of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) where appropriate intervention might prevent or delay 
conversion to AD. Given this, there has been increasing interest in using 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and neuropsychological testing to predict 
conversion from MCI to AD. Recent evidence suggests that the choroid plexus 
(ChP), neural substrates implicated in brain clearance, undergo volumetric 
changes in MCI and AD. Whether the ChP is involved in memory changes observed in 
MCI and can be used to predict conversion from MCI to AD has not been explored.
METHOD: The current study used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database to investigate whether later progression from MCI to 
AD (progressive MCI [pMCI], n = 115) or stable MCI (sMCI, n = 338) was 
associated with memory scores using the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) and ChP volumes as calculated from MRI. Classification analyses 
identifying pMCI or sMCI group membership were performed to compare the 
predictive ability of the RAVLT and ChP volumes.
FINDING: The results indicated a significant difference between pMCI and sMCI 
groups for right ChP volume, with the pMCI group showing significantly larger 
right ChP volume (p = .01, 95% confidence interval [-.116, -.015]). A 
significant linear relationship between the RAVLT scores and right ChP volume 
was found across all participants, but not for the two groups separately. 
Classification analyses showed that a combination of left ChP volume and 
auditory verbal learning scores resulted in the most accurate classification 
performance, with group membership accurately predicted for 72% of the testing 
data.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that volumetric ChP changes appear to occur 
before the onset of AD and might provide value in predicting conversion from MCI 
to AD.

© 2024 The Author(s). Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.3611
PMCID: PMC11219301
PMID: 38956818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neuroimage. 2014 Jul 1;94:275-286. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.036. Epub 
2014 Mar 21.

Manifold population modeling as a neuro-imaging biomarker: application to ADNI 
and ADNI-GO.

Guerrero R(1), Wolz R(2), Rao AW(2), Rueckert D(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK. Electronic address: 
reg09@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK.

We propose a framework for feature extraction from learned low-dimensional 
subspaces that represent inter-subject variability. The manifold subspace is 
built from data-driven regions of interest (ROI). The regions are learned via 
sparse regression using the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score as an 
independent variable which correlates better with the actual disease stage than 
a discrete class label. The sparse regression is used to perform variable 
selection along with a re-sampling scheme to reduce sampling bias. We then use 
the learned manifold coordinates to perform visualization and classification of 
the subjects. Results of the proposed approach are shown using the ADNI and 
ADNI-GO datasets. Three types of classification techniques, including a new MRI 
Disease-State-Score (MRI-DSS) classifier, are tested in conjunction with two 
learning strategies. In the first case Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and progressive 
mild cognitive impairment (pMCI) subjects were grouped together, while cognitive 
normal (CN) and stable mild cognitive impaired (sMCI) subjects were also grouped 
together. In the second approach, the classifiers are learned using the original 
class labels (with no grouping). We show results that are comparable to other 
state-of-the-art methods. A classification rate of 71%, of arguably the most 
clinically relevant subjects, sMCI and pMCI, is shown. Additionally, we present 
classification accuracies between CN and early MCI (eMCI) subjects, from the 
ADNI-GO dataset, of 65%. To our knowledge this is the first time classification 
accuracies for eMCI patients have been reported.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.036
PMID: 24657351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMC Neurol. 2020 Apr 21;20(1):148. doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01728-x.

Predicting MCI progression with FDG-PET and cognitive scores: a longitudinal 
study.

Teng L(1), Li Y(2), Zhao Y(2), Hu T(2), Zhang Z(2), Yao Z(3), Hu B(4); 
Alzheimer’ s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100032, P.R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, 730000, P.R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, 730000, P.R. China. yaozj@lzu.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing of Gansu Province, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, 730000, P.R. China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is an intermediate stage between 
normal aging and dementia. Studies on MCI progression are important for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) prevention. 18F fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission 
tomography (FDG-PET) has been proven to be a powerful tool for measuring 
cerebral glucose metabolism. In this study, we proposed a classification 
framework for MCI prediction with both baseline and multiple follow-up FDG-PET 
scans as well as cognitive scores of 33 progressive MCI (pMCI) patients and 46 
stable MCI (sMCI) patients from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI).
METHOD: First, PET images were normalized using the Yakushev normalization 
procedure and registered to the Brainnetome Atlas (BNA). The average metabolic 
intensities of brain regions were defined as static features. Dynamic features 
were the intensity variation between baseline and the other three time points 
and change ratios with the intensity obtained at baseline considered as 
reference. Mini-mental State Examination (MMSE) scores and Alzheimer's disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive section (ADAS-cog) scores of each time point were 
collected as cognitive features. And F-score was applied for feature selection. 
Finally, support vector machine (SVM) with radial basis function (RBF) kernel 
was used for the three above features.
RESULTS: Dynamic features showed the best classification performance in accuracy 
of 88.61% than static features (accuracy of 78.48%). And the combination of 
cognitive features and dynamic features improved the classification performance 
in specificity of 95.65% and Area Under Curve (AUC) of 0.9308.
CONCLUSION: Our results reported that dynamic features are more representative 
in longitudinal research for MCI prediction work. And dynamic features and 
cognitive scores complementarily enhance the classification performance in 
specificity and AUC. These findings may predict the disease course and clinical 
changes in individuals with mild cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-020-01728-x
PMCID: PMC7171825
PMID: 32316912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


36. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;61(1):79-89. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170498.

Cognitive Variability Predicts Incident Alzheimer's Disease and Mild Cognitive 
Impairment Comparable to a Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarker.

Gleason CE(1)(2)(3), Norton D(3)(4), Anderson ED(5), Wahoske M(1)(3), Washington 
DT(1)(2)(3), Umucu E(6), Koscik RL(7), Dowling NM(8), Johnson SC(1)(2)(3)(8), 
Carlsson CM(1)(2)(3)(8), Asthana S(1)(2)(3)(8); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center (11G), William S. Middleton 
Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)University of Wisconsin, Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Wright State University, School of Education and Human Services, Dayton, OH, 
USA.
(6)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, El 
Paso, TX, USA.
(7)Wisconsin Alzheimer's Institute, Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(8)George Washington University, School of Nursing, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers are emerging as critically 
important for disease detection and monitoring. Most biomarkers are obtained 
through invasive, resource-intense procedures. A cognitive marker, 
intra-individual cognitive variability (IICV) may provide an alternative or 
adjunct marker of disease risk for individuals unable or disinclined to undergo 
lumbar puncture.
OBJECTIVE: To contrast risk of incident AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
associated with IICV to risk associated with well-established biomarkers: 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) phosphorylated tau protein (p-tau181) and amyloid-β 42 
(Aβ42) peptide.
METHODS: Dispersion in cognitive performance, IICV, was estimated with a 
published algorithm, and included Trail Making Test A and B, Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test (RAVLT), and the American National Adult Reading Test (ANART). CSF 
biomarkers were expressed as a ratio: p-tau181/Aβ42, wherein high values 
signified pathognomonic profiles. Logistic regression models included 
longitudinal data from 349 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
participants who completed lumbar puncture. All subjects were cognitively 
healthy (n = 105) or diagnosed with MCI (n = 244) at baseline. We examined odds 
of conversion associated with baseline elevations in IICV and/or ratio of CSF 
p-tau181/Aβ42.
RESULTS: When included in models alone or in combination with CSF p-tau181/Aβ42, 
one standard IICV unit higher was associated with an estimated odds ratio for 
incident AD or MCI of 2.81 (95% CI: 1.83-4.33) in the most inclusive sample, and 
an odds ratio of 3.41 (95% CI: 2.03-5.73) when restricted to participants with 
MCI. Iterative analyses suggested that IICV independently improved model fit 
even when individual index components were included in comparative models.
CONCLUSIONS: These analyses provide preliminary support for IICV as a marker of 
incident AD and MCI. This easily-disseminated, non-invasive marker compared 
favorably to well-established CSF biomarkers.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170498
PMCID: PMC5714663
PMID: 29125485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest/Disclosure Statement The 
authors have no conflict of interest to report.


37. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2024 Mar 19;16(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s13195-024-01428-5.

Comparing a pre-defined versus deep learning approach for extracting brain 
atrophy patterns to predict cognitive decline due to Alzheimer's disease in 
patients with mild cognitive symptoms.

Arvidsson I(1), Strandberg O(2), Palmqvist S(2)(3), Stomrud E(2)(3), Cullen 
N(2), Janelidze S(2), Tideman P(2)(3), Heyden A(4), Åström K(4), Hansson 
O(2)(3), Mattsson-Carlgren N(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
ida.arvidsson@math.lth.se.
(2)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(4)Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden. niklas.mattsson-carlgren@med.lu.se.
(6)Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
niklas.mattsson-carlgren@med.lu.se.
(7)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
niklas.mattsson-carlgren@med.lu.se.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Nov 08:rs.3.rs-3569391. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3569391/v1.

BACKGROUND: Predicting future Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related cognitive decline 
among individuals with subjective cognitive decline (SCD) or mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) is an important task for healthcare. Structural brain imaging 
as measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could potentially contribute 
when making such predictions. It is unclear if the predictive performance of MRI 
can be improved using entire brain images in deep learning (DL) models compared 
to using pre-defined brain regions.
METHODS: A cohort of 332 individuals with SCD/MCI were included from the Swedish 
BioFINDER-1 study. The goal was to predict longitudinal SCD/MCI-to-AD dementia 
progression and change in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) over four years. 
Four models were evaluated using different predictors: (1) clinical data only, 
including demographics, cognitive tests and APOE ε4 status, (2) clinical data 
plus hippocampal volume, (3) clinical data plus all regional MRI gray matter 
volumes (N = 68) extracted using FreeSurfer software, (4) a DL model trained 
using multi-task learning with MRI images, Jacobian determinant images and 
baseline cognition as input. A double cross-validation scheme, with five test 
folds and for each of those ten validation folds, was used. External evaluation 
was performed on part of the ADNI dataset, including 108 patients. Mann-Whitney 
U-test was used to determine statistically significant differences in 
performance, with p-values less than 0.05 considered significant.
RESULTS: In the BioFINDER cohort, 109 patients (33%) progressed to AD dementia. 
The performance of the clinical data model for prediction of progression to AD 
dementia was area under the curve (AUC) = 0.85 and four-year cognitive decline 
was R2 = 0.14. The performance was improved for both outcomes when adding 
hippocampal volume (AUC = 0.86, R2 = 0.16). Adding FreeSurfer brain regions 
improved prediction of four-year cognitive decline but not progression to AD 
(AUC = 0.83, R2 = 0.17), while the DL model worsened the performance for both 
outcomes (AUC = 0.84, R2 = 0.08). A sensitivity analysis showed that the 
Jacobian determinant image was more informative than the MRI image, but that 
performance was maximized when both were included. In the external evaluation 
cohort from ADNI, 23 patients (21%) progressed to AD dementia. The results for 
predicted progression to AD dementia were similar to the results for the 
BioFINDER test data, while the performance for the cognitive decline was 
deteriorated.
CONCLUSIONS: The DL model did not significantly improve the prediction of 
clinical disease progression in AD, compared to regression models with a single 
pre-defined brain region.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-024-01428-5
PMCID: PMC10949809
PMID: 38504336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OH has acquired research support (for the 
institution) from ADx, AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, Eisai, 
Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche. In the past 2 years, he has 
received consultancy/speaker fees from AC Immune, Amylyx, Alzpath, BioArctic, 
Biogen, Cerveau, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Fujirebio, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, 
Roche, Sanofi and Siemens. SP has acquired research support (for the 
institution) from ki elements / ADDF. In the past 2 years, he has received 
consultancy/speaker fees from BioArtic, Biogen, Lilly, and Roche.


38. J Neurol Sci. 2023 Oct 15;453:120812. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2023.120812. Epub 2023 
Sep 22.

Deep learning analysis of UPLC-MS/MS-based metabolomics data to predict 
Alzheimer's disease.

Wang K(1), Theeke LA(2), Liao C(3), Wang N(4), Lu Y(5), Xiao D(6), Xu C(7); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Electronic address: kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)School of Nursing, The George Washington University, Ashburn, VA 20147, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, MA 
02215, USA.
(4)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.
(6)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA 
02493, USA.
(7)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA. Electronic 
address: chun.xu@utrgv.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Metabolic biomarkers can potentially inform disease progression in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The purpose of this study is to identify and describe 
a new set of diagnostic biomarkers for developing deep learning (DL) tools to 
predict AD using Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry 
(UPLC-MS/MS)-based metabolomics data.
METHODS: A total of 177 individuals, including 78 with AD and 99 with cognitive 
normal (CN), were selected from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) cohort along with 150 metabolomic biomarkers. We performed feature 
selection using the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO). The 
H2O DL function was used to build multilayer feedforward neural networks to 
predict AD.
RESULTS: The LASSO selected 21 metabolic biomarkers. To develop DL models, the 
21 biomarkers identified by LASSO were imported into the H2O package. The data 
was split into 70% for training and 30% for validation. The best DL model with 
two layers and 18 neurons achieved an accuracy of 0.881, F1-score of 0.892, and 
AUC of 0.873. Several metabolomic biomarkers involved in glucose and lipid 
metabolism, in particular bile acid metabolites, were associated with APOE-ε4 
allele and clinical biomarkers (Aβ42, tTau, pTau), cognitive assessments [the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 (ADAS13), the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)], and hippocampus volume.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a new set of diagnostic metabolomic 
biomarkers for developing DL tools to predict AD. These biomarkers may help with 
early diagnosis, prognostic risk stratification, and/or early treatment 
interventions for patients at risk for AD.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2023.120812
PMID: 37776718

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


39. Eur J Neurol. 2024 Jan;31(1):e16072. doi: 10.1111/ene.16072. Epub 2023 Sep 22.

Frailty is associated with the clinical expression of neuropsychological 
deficits in older adults.

Canevelli M(1)(2), Wallace LMK(3), Bruno G(1), Cesari M(4), Rockwood K(5)(6)(7), 
Ward DD(5)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Neuroscience, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Aging Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Cambridge Public Health, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Divisions of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine & Neurology, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(6)Geriatric Medicine Research, Centre for Health Care of the Elderly, Nova 
Scotia Health Authority, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(7)Kathryn Allen Weldon Professor of Alzheimer Research, Department of Medicine, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, Centre for Health Services Research, The University of 
Queensland, Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The aim was to determine whether frailty is associated 
with the relationship between neuropsychological markers and global cognition in 
older adults.
METHODS: Cross-sectional analyzes were conducted of baseline data from three 
large cohort studies: National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC), Rush 
Memory and Aging Project (MAP) and Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). Studies recruited North American participants along the spectrum of 
cognitive functioning (44% no cognitive impairment at baseline). A frailty index 
was computed in each dataset. Frailty indices, neuropsychological tests 
(including measures of processing speed, episodic, semantic and working memory) 
and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were the variables of interest, 
with age, sex, education and apolipoprotein E ε4 evaluated as confounders.
RESULTS: Across all studies, 23,819 participants aged 55-104 (57% female) were 
included in analyzes. Frailty index scores were significantly and inversely 
associated with MMSE scores and significantly moderated relationships between 
neuropsychological test scores and MMSE scores. In participants with higher 
frailty index scores, lower neuropsychological test scores were more strongly 
associated with lower MMSE scores (standardized interaction coefficients ranged 
from -0.19 to -1.17 in NACC, -0.03 to -2.27 in MAP and -0.04 to -0.38 in ADNI, 
depending on the neuropsychological test). These associations were consistent 
across the different databases and were mostly independent of the composition of 
frailty indices (i.e., after excluding possible symptoms of dementia).
CONCLUSIONS: Amongst older Americans, frailty is associated with the cognitive 
expression of neuropsychological deficits. Implementation of frailty assessment 
in routine neurological and neuropsychological practice should be considered to 
optimize care outcomes for older adults.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16072
PMCID: PMC11235878
PMID: 37738515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KR is Co‐founder of Ardea Outcomes, which (as 
DGI Clinical) in the last 3 years has contracts with pharma and device 
manufacturers on individualized outcome measurement. MCa, LMKW, GB, MCe and DDW 
have nothing to report.


40. Aging Ment Health. 2022 Oct;26(10):1988-1996. doi: 
10.1080/13607863.2021.1966746. Epub 2021 Aug 19.

Metrological properties of neuropsychological tests for measuring cognitive 
change in individuals with prodromal Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang X(1), Wu Y(1), He Y(1), Ge X(1), Cui J(1), Han H(2), Luo Y(1), Liu L(1), 
Wang Z(1), Yu H(1)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(2)bDepartment of Mathematics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Diseases Risk Assessment, Taiyuan, 
China.

OBJECTIVES: In Alzheimer's Disease (AD) research, choosing appropriate method 
for measuring change in cognitive function over time can be challenging. The aim 
for this study was to examine the sensitivity of four neuropsychological tests 
used to measure cognition during the transition from mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) to AD, and the impacts of associated covariates.
METHODS: We enrolled 223 patients with MCI who progressed to AD and had 
completed multiple follow-up assessments in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database. We constructed nonlinear mixed model for 
multivariate longitudinal data assuming that multiple neuropsychological tests 
would exhibit nonlinear transformation of a common factor in the latent 
cognitive process underlying the progression from MCI to AD.
RESULTS: The Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of the Boxes (CDR-SB) and Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale (11 items; ADAS-11) were more sensitive to cognitive 
changes in individuals with higher cognitive function, the Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was more sensitive to cognitive changes in individuals with 
middle cognitive function, and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was more 
sensitive to cognitive changes in individuals with lower cognitive function. 
Gender (p = 0.0139) and educational level (p = 0.0094) had varying effects on 
different tests, such that men performed better on the FAQ and CDR-SB, and 
individuals with higher educational level tended to perform better on the FAQ 
and MMSE.
CONCLUSIONS: When choosing appropriate neuropsychological tests in cognitive 
measurements, the cognitive functional level of the patient as well as the 
impacts of covariates should be considered.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2021.1966746
PMID: 34409904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019 Feb 26;11:36. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00036. 
eCollection 2019.

The Relationship Between Hippocampal Volumes and Delayed Recall Is Modified by 
APOE ε4 in Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Wang X(1), Zhou W(2), Ye T(3), Lin X(1), Zhang J(4); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Wenzhou Seventh People's Hospital, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Ultrasound, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, China.
(4)Independent Researcher, Hangzhou, China.

Objective: To investigate whether APOE ε4 affects the association of verbal 
memory with neurodegeneration presented by the hippocampal volume/intracranial 
volume ratio (HpVR). Methods: The study sample included 371 individuals with 
normal cognition (NC), 725 subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
(aMCI), and 251 patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who underwent the rey auditory verbal 
learning test (RAVLT). Multiple linear regression models were conducted to 
assess the effect of the APOE ε4∗HpVR interaction on RAVLT in all subjects and 
in each diagnostic group adjusting for age, gender and educational attainment, 
and global cognition. Results: In all subjects, there was no significant APOE ε4 
× HpVR interaction for immediate recall or delayed recall (p > 0.05). However, 
in aMCI subjects, there was a significant APOE ε4 × HpVR interaction for delayed 
recall (p = 0.008), but not immediate recall (p = 0.15). More specifically, the 
detrimental effect of APOE ε4 on delayed recall altered by HpVR such that this 
effect was most evident among subjects with small to moderate HpVR, but this 
disadvantage was absent or even reversed among subjects with larger HpVR. No 
significant interaction was observed in the NC or AD group. Conclusion: These 
findings highlight a potential role of APOE ε4 status in affecting the 
association of hippocampus size with delayed recall memory in the early stage of 
AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00036
PMCID: PMC6399520
PMID: 30863302


42. Neuroimage. 2022 Nov 15;262:119527. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119527. Epub 
2022 Jul 30.

β-amyloid PET harmonisation across longitudinal studies: Application to AIBL, 
ADNI and OASIS3.

Bourgeat P(1), Doré V(2), Burnham SC(3), Benzinger T(4), Tosun D(5), Li S(3), 
Goyal M(6), LaMontagne P(6), Jin L(7), Rowe CC(8), Weiner MW(5), Morris JC(9), 
Masters CL(7), Fripp J(3), Villemagne VL(10); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative, OASIS3, and the AIBL research group.

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address: 
Pierrick.bourgeat@csiro.au.
(2)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Brisbane, Australia; Department of Molecular 
Imaging & Therapy, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Knight Alzheimer Disease Research Center, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA,; 
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, USA.
(7)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Department of Molecular Imaging & Therapy, Austin Health, Melbourne, 
Australia; The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia.
(9)Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(10)Department of Molecular Imaging & Therapy, Austin Health, Melbourne, 
Australia; Department of Psychiatry, The University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The Centiloid scale was developed to harmonise the quantification 
of β-amyloid (Aβ) PET images across tracers, scanners, and processing pipelines. 
However, several groups have reported differences across tracers and scanners 
even after centiloid conversion. In this study, we aim to evaluate the impact of 
different pre and post-processing harmonisation steps on the robustness of 
longitudinal Centiloid data across three large international cohort studies.
METHODS: All Aβ PET data in AIBL (N = 3315), ADNI (N = 3442) and OASIS3 
(N = 1398) were quantified using the MRI-based Centiloid standard SPM pipeline 
and the PET-only pipeline CapAIBL. SUVR were converted into Centiloids using 
each tracer's respective transform. Global Aβ burden from pre-defined target 
cortical regions in Centiloid units were quantified for both raw PET scans and 
PET scans smoothed to a uniform 8 mm full width half maximum (FWHM) effective 
smoothness. For Florbetapir, we assessed the performance of using both the 
standard Whole Cerebellum (WCb) and a composite white matter (WM)+WCb reference 
region. Additionally, our recently proposed quantification based on Non-negative 
Matrix Factorisation (NMF) was applied to all spatially and SUVR normalised 
images. Correlation with clinical severity measured by the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and effect size, as well as tracer agreement in 
11C-PiB-18F-Florbetapir pairs and longitudinal consistency were evaluated.
RESULTS: The smoothing to a uniform resolution partially reduced longitudinal 
variability, but did not improve inter-tracer agreement, effect size or 
correlation with MMSE. Using a Composite reference region for 18F-Florbetapir 
improved inter-tracer agreement, effect size, correlation with MMSE, and 
longitudinal consistency. The best results were however obtained when using the 
NMF method which outperformed all other quantification approaches in all metrics 
used.
CONCLUSIONS: FWHM smoothing has limited impact on longitudinal consistency or 
outliers. A Composite reference region including subcortical WM should be used 
for computing both cross-sectional and longitudinal Florbetapir Centiloid. NMF 
improves Centiloid quantification on all metrics examined.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119527
PMCID: PMC9550562
PMID: 35917917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Appl Neuropsychol Adult. 2022 Dec 29:1-6. doi: 10.1080/23279095.2022.2161050. 
Online ahead of print.

Clinical value of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment free recall condition alone 
versus cued recall and recognition conditions to detect true memory impairment.

De Wit L(1), Goldstein FC(1), Loring DW(1).

Author information:
(1)Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is widely used as a screener to 
characterize cognition. Although only the delayed free recall condition is 
required for administration, performance on the optional cued recall and 
multiple-choice recognition conditions may improve diagnostic accuracy over free 
recall alone. Data on 719 individuals with MCI and 601 controls were obtained 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. The Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) delayed free recall condition was used as 
the gold standard of memory status. Participants with T-scores ≤30 (≤2 SDs below 
the mean) were classified as memory "impaired." Binary logistic regressions 
assessed if combined MoCA cued recall/recognition predicted impaired delayed 
recall on the AVLT beyond the contribution of MoCA free recall. Results showed 
that MoCA free recall predicted AVLT delayed recall, and that the addition of 
combined MoCA cued recall/recognition improved the ability to detect impaired 
AVLT recall, with a better overall model fit. The combined MoCA cued 
recall/recognition score also had higher specificity and likelihood ratios in 
detecting memory impairment than MoCA free recall, while higher sensitivity 
values were present for free recall. Thus, the additional administration of the 
MoCA cued recall and recognition is recommended.

DOI: 10.1080/23279095.2022.2161050
PMID: 36583247


44. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Feb 23;14:943566. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.943566. 
eCollection 2022.

Patterns of structure-function association in normal aging and in Alzheimer's 
disease: Screening for mild cognitive impairment and dementia with ML regression 
and classification models.

Statsenko Y(1)(2), Meribout S(3), Habuza T(2)(4), Almansoori TM(1), Gorkom 
KN(1), Gelovani JG(1)(5)(6)(7), Ljubisavljevic M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Big Data Analytics Center (BIDAC), United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Constantine 3, Constantine, Algeria.
(4)College of Information Technology, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(6)Biomedical Engineering Department, College of Engineering, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, MI, United States.
(7)Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Salaya, Thailand.
(8)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(9)Abu Dhabi Precision Medicine Virtual Research Institute (ADPMVRI), United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: The combined analysis of imaging and functional modalities is 
supposed to improve diagnostics of neurodegenerative diseases with advanced data 
science techniques.
OBJECTIVE: To get an insight into normal and accelerated brain aging by 
developing the machine learning models that predict individual performance in 
neuropsychological and cognitive tests from brain MRI. With these models we 
endeavor to look for patterns of brain structure-function association (SFA) 
indicative of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's dementia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We explored the age-related variability of cognitive and 
neuropsychological test scores in normal and accelerated aging and constructed 
regression models predicting functional performance in cognitive tests from 
brain radiomics data. The models were trained on the three study cohorts from 
ADNI dataset-cognitively normal individuals, patients with MCI or 
dementia-separately. We also looked for significant correlations between 
cortical parcellation volumes and test scores in the cohorts to investigate 
neuroanatomical differences in relation to cognitive status. Finally, we worked 
out an approach for the classification of the examinees according to the pattern 
of structure-function associations into the cohorts of the cognitively normal 
elderly and patients with MCI or dementia.
RESULTS: In the healthy population, the global cognitive functioning slightly 
changes with age. It also remains stable across the disease course in the 
majority of cases. In healthy adults and patients with MCI or dementia, the 
trendlines of performance in digit symbol substitution test and trail making 
test converge at the approximated point of 100 years of age. According to the 
SFA pattern, we distinguish three cohorts: the cognitively normal elderly, 
patients with MCI, and dementia. The highest accuracy is achieved with the model 
trained to predict the mini-mental state examination score from voxel-based 
morphometry data. The application of the majority voting technique to models 
predicting results in cognitive tests improved the classification performance up 
to 91.95% true positive rate for healthy participants, 86.21%-for MCI and 
80.18%-for dementia cases.
CONCLUSION: The machine learning model, when trained on the cases of this of 
that group, describes a disease-specific SFA pattern. The pattern serves as a 
"stamp" of the disease reflected by the model.

Copyright © 2023 Statsenko, Meribout, Habuza, Almansoori, Gorkom, Gelovani and 
Ljubisavljevic.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.943566
PMCID: PMC9995946
PMID: 36910862

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


45. Neurodegener Dis. 2020;20(4):153-164. doi: 10.1159/000515322. Epub 2021 Mar 31.

Brain Atrophy Subtypes and the ATN Classification Scheme in Alzheimer's Disease.

Cedres N(1), Ekman U(1), Poulakis K(1), Shams S(1)(2)(3), Cavallin L(1)(2)(3), 
Muehlboeck S(1), Granberg T(1)(2)(3), Wahlund LO(1), Ferreira D(1), Westman 
E(1)(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Center for Alzheimer Research, Care Sciences, and Society, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Neuroradiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Centre for Neuroimaging 
Sciences, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated the association between atrophy subtypes of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the ATN classification scheme, and key demographic and 
clinical factors in 2 cohorts with different source characteristics (a highly 
selective research-oriented cohort, the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative [ADNI]; and a naturalistic heterogeneous clinically oriented cohort, 
Karolinska Imaging Dementia Study [KIDS]).
METHODS: A total of 382 AD patients were included. Factorial analysis of mixed 
data was used to investigate associations between AD subtypes based on brain 
atrophy patterns, ATN profiles based on cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, and age, 
sex, Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), cerebrovascular disease (burden of 
white matter signal abnormalities, WMSAs), and APOE genotype.
RESULTS: Older patients with high WMSA burden, belonging to the typical AD 
subtype and showing A+T+N+ or A+T+N- profiles clustered together and were mainly 
from ADNI. Younger patients with low WMSA burden, limbic-predominant or minimal 
atrophy AD subtypes, and A+T-N- or A+T-N+ profiles clustered together and were 
mainly from KIDS. APOE ε4 carriers more frequently showed the A+T-N- and A+T+N- 
profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings align with the recent framework for biological 
subtypes of AD: the combination of risk factors, protective factors, and brain 
pathologies determines belonging of AD patients to distinct subtypes.

© 2021 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000515322
PMID: 33789287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2022 Dec;44(10):703-712. doi: 
10.1080/13803395.2023.2167942. Epub 2023 Feb 20.

Predicting conversion of patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's 
disease using bedside cognitive assessments.

Clarke A(1), Ashe C(1), Jenkinson J(1), Rowe O(1), A D N I(1), Hyland P(1), 
Commins S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Patients diagnosed with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) often go 
on to develop dementia, however many do not. Although cognitive tests are widely 
used in the clinic, there is limited research on their potential to help predict 
which patients may progress to Alzheimer's disease (AD) from those that do not.
METHODS: MCI patients (n = 325) from the longitudinal Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-2) dataset were tracked across a 5 year period. 
Upon initial diagnosis, all patients underwent a series of cognitive tests 
including the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog 
13). Twenty-five percent (n = 83) of those initially diagnosed with MCI 
subsequently developed AD within 5 years.
RESULTS: We showed that those individuals that progressed to AD had 
significantly lower scores upon baseline testing on the MMSE and MoCA, and 
higher scores on the ADAS-13, compared to those that did not convert. However, 
not all tests were equivalent. We showed that the ADAS-13 offers the best 
predictability of conversion (Adjusted Odds ratio (AOR) = 3.91). This 
predictability was higher than that offered by the two primary biomarker 
Amyloid-beta (Aβ, AOR = 1.99) and phospho-tau (Ptau, AOR = 1.72). Further 
analysis on the ADAS-13 showed that MCI patients that subsequently converted to 
AD performed particularly poorly on delayed-recall (AOR = 1.93), word 
recognition (AOR = 1.66), word finding difficulty (AOR = 1.55) and orientation 
(1.38) test items.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive testing using the ADAS-13 may offer a simpler, less 
invasive, more clinically relevant and a more effective method of determining 
those that are in danger of converting from MCI to AD.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2023.2167942
PMID: 36803664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. IEEE J Transl Eng Health Med. 2022 Nov 4;11:1-12. doi: 
10.1109/JTEHM.2022.3219775. eCollection 2023.

Explainable Tensor Multi-Task Ensemble Learning Based on Brain Structure 
Variation for Alzheimer's Disease Dynamic Prediction.

Zhang Y(1), Liu T(1), Lanfranchi V(1), Yang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer ScienceThe University of Sheffield Sheffield S10 2TN 
U.K.

Machine learning approaches for predicting Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression 
can substantially assist researchers and clinicians in developing effective AD 
preventive and treatment strategies. This study proposes a novel machine 
learning algorithm to predict the AD progression utilising a multi-task ensemble 
learning approach. Specifically, we present a novel tensor multi-task learning 
(MTL) algorithm based on similarity measurement of spatio-temporal variability 
of brain biomarkers to model AD progression. In this model, the prediction of 
each patient sample in the tensor is set as one task, where all tasks share a 
set of latent factors obtained through tensor decomposition. Furthermore, as 
subjects have continuous records of brain biomarker testing, the model is 
extended to ensemble the subjects' temporally continuous prediction results 
utilising a gradient boosting kernel to find more accurate predictions. We have 
conducted extensive experiments utilising data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
algorithm and model. Results demonstrate that the proposed model have superior 
accuracy and stability in predicting AD progression compared to benchmarks and 
state-of-the-art multi-task regression methods in terms of the Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) questionnaire and The Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) cognitive scores. Brain biomarker 
correlation information can be utilised to identify variations in individual 
brain structures and the model can be utilised to effectively predict the 
progression of AD with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data and cognitive 
scores of AD patients at different stages.

DOI: 10.1109/JTEHM.2022.3219775
PMCID: PMC9721355
PMID: 36478772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neuroinformatics. 2020 Oct;18(4):531-548. doi: 10.1007/s12021-020-09459-7.

Computing Univariate Neurodegenerative Biomarkers with Volumetric Optimal 
Transportation: A Pilot Study.

Tu Y(1), Mi L(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang J(2), Fan Y(1), Goradia D(3), 
Chen K(3), Caselli RJ(4), Reiman EM(3), Gu X(2), Wang Y(5); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, P.O. Box 878809, Tempe, AZ, 85287, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(3)Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(5)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, P.O. Box 878809, Tempe, AZ, 85287, USA. ylwang@asu.edu.

Changes in cognitive performance due to neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) are closely correlated to the brain structure 
alteration. A univariate and personalized neurodegenerative biomarker with 
strong statistical power based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) will benefit 
clinical diagnosis and prognosis of neurodegenerative diseases. However, few 
biomarkers of this type have been developed, especially those that are robust to 
image noise and applicable to clinical analyses. In this paper, we introduce a 
variational framework to compute optimal transportation (OT) on brain structural 
MRI volumes and develop a univariate neuroimaging index based on OT to quantify 
neurodegenerative alterations. Specifically, we compute the OT from each image 
to a template and measure the Wasserstein distance between them. The obtained 
Wasserstein distance, Wasserstein Index (WI) for short to specify the distance 
to a template, is concise, informative and robust to random noise. Comparing to 
the popular linear programming-based OT computation method, our framework makes 
use of Newton's method, which makes it possible to compute WI in large-scale 
datasets. Experimental results, on 314 subjects (140 Aβ + AD and 174 Aβ- normal 
controls) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) baseline 
dataset, provide preliminary evidence that the proposed WI is correlated with a 
clinical cognitive measure (the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score), and 
it is able to identify group difference and achieve a good classification 
accuracy, outperforming two other popular univariate indices including 
hippocampal volume and entorhinal cortex thickness. The current pilot work 
suggests the application of WI as a potential univariate neurodegenerative 
biomarker.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-020-09459-7
PMCID: PMC7502473
PMID: 32253701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Feb 22;14(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-00973-1.

Relationship of sex differences in cortical thickness and memory among 
cognitively healthy subjects and individuals with mild cognitive impairment and 
Alzheimer disease.

Cieri F(#)(1), Zhuang X(#)(1)(2), Cordes D(1)(3), Kaplan N(1), Cummings J(4), 
Caldwell J(5); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Nevada Las Vegas 
(UNLV), Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(3)University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
(4)Chambers-Grundy Center for Transformative Neuroscience, Department of Brain 
Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas 
(UNLV), Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(5)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, USA. 
caldwej5@ccf.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: An aging society has increased rates of late onset Alzheimer disease 
dementia (ADD), the most common form of age-related dementia. This 
neurodegenerative disease disproportionately affects women.
METHODS: We use data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
to examine sex differences in cortical thickness (CT) and memory performance. 
Analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) models were used to examine effects of sex and 
diagnosis (DX) on CT and verbal memory. For regions demonstrating significant 
interaction effects of sex and DX, we tested whether sex moderated 
cognition-thickness relationships. We used machine learning as a complementary 
method to explore multivariate CT differences between women and men.
RESULTS: Women demonstrated greater CT in many brain regions. More specifically, 
men showed relatively consistent CT declines in all stages, from normal control 
(NC) to ADD in the bilateral cingulate cortex, bilateral temporal regions, and 
left precuneus; women had more stable CT in these regions between NC and mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) stages, but sharper declines from MCI to ADD. 
Similarly, for the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT), ANCOVA analyses 
showed that women had significantly better immediate and delayed recall scores 
than men, at NC and MCI stages, but greater differences, cross-sectionally, from 
MCI to ADD than men. We found significant sex moderation effects between 
RAVLT-immediate scores and CT of right isthmus-cingulate for all subjects across 
DX. Partial correlation analyses revealed that increased CT of right 
isthmus-cingulate was associated with better verbal learning in women, driven by 
positron emission tomography defined amyloid positive (Aβ+) subjects. 
Significant sex-moderation effects in cognition-thickness relationships were 
further found in the right middle-temporal, left precuneus, and left superior 
temporal regions in Aβ+ subjects. Using a machine learning approach, we 
investigated multivariate CT differences between women and men, showing an 
accuracy in classification of 75% for Aβ+ cognitively NC participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Sex differences in memory and CT can play a key role in the 
different vulnerability and progression of ADD in women compared to men. Machine 
learning indicates sex differences in CT are most relevant early in the ADD 
neurodegeneration.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-00973-1
PMCID: PMC8864917
PMID: 35193682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


50. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Dec 13;14(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-01136-y.

Associations of MRI-visible perivascular spaces with longitudinal cognitive 
decline across the Alzheimer's disease spectrum.

Wang ML(1), Zou QQ(1), Sun Z(1), Wei XE(1), Li PY(2), Wu X(3), Li YH(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No. 600, Yi Shan Road, 
Shanghai, 200233, China.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Pauley Heart Center, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(3)Institute for Global Health Sciences, University of California San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No. 600, Yi Shan Road, 
Shanghai, 200233, China. liyuehua312@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the characteristics and associations of MRI-visible 
perivascular spaces (PVS) with clinical progression and longitudinal cognitive 
decline across the Alzheimer's disease spectrum.
METHODS: We included 1429 participants (641 [44.86%] female) from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. PVS number and 
grade in the centrum semiovale (CSO-PVS), basal ganglia (BG-PVS), and 
hippocampus (HP-PVS) were compared among the control (CN), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and Alzheimer's disease (AD) groups. PVS were tested as 
predictors of diagnostic progression (i.e., CN to MCI/AD or MCI to AD) and 
longitudinal changes in the 13-item Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog 13), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
memory (ADNI-MEM), and executive function (ADNI-EF) using multiple linear 
regression, linear mixed-effects, and Cox proportional hazards modeling.
RESULTS: Compared with CN subjects, MCI and AD subjects had more CSO-PVS, both 
in number (p < 0.001) and grade (p < 0.001). However, there was no significant 
difference in BG-PVS and HP-PVS across the AD spectrum (p > 0.05). Individuals 
with moderate and frequent/severe CSO-PVS had a higher diagnostic conversion 
risk than individuals with no/mild CSO-PVS (log-rank p < 0.001 for all) in the 
combined CN and MCI group. Further Cox regression analyses revealed that 
moderate and frequent/severe CSO-PVS were associated with a higher risk of 
diagnostic conversion (HR = 2.007, 95% CI = 1.382-2.914, p < 0.001; HR = 2.676, 
95% CI = 1.830-3.911, p < 0.001, respectively). A higher CSO-PVS number was 
associated with baseline cognitive performance and longitudinal cognitive 
decline in all cognitive tests (p < 0.05 for all).
CONCLUSIONS: CSO-PVS were more common in MCI and AD and were associated with 
cognitive decline across the AD spectrum.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-01136-y
PMCID: PMC9746143
PMID: 36514127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


51. Brain Commun. 2021 Sep 1;3(3):fcab199. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab199. 
eCollection 2021.

Subjective cognitive decline: opposite links to neurodegeneration across the 
Alzheimer's continuum.

Kuhn E(1), Perrotin A(2), Tomadesso C(1), André C(1), Sherif S(1), Bejanin A(1), 
Touron E(1), Landeau B(1), Mezenge F(1), Vivien D(1), De La Sayette V(2), 
Chételat G(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INSERM, U1237, PhIND "Physiopathology and Imaging of 
Neurological Disorders", Institut Blood and Brain @ Caen-Normandie, Cyceron, 
14000 Caen, France.
(2)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, PSL Université, EPHE, INSERM, U1077, CHU de Caen, 
GIP Cyceron, NIMH, 14000 Caen, France.

Subjective memory decline is associated with neurodegeneration and increased 
risk of cognitive decline in participants with no or subjective cognitive 
impairment, while in patients with mild cognitive impairment or Alzheimer's-type 
dementia, findings are inconsistent. Our aim was to provide a comprehensive 
overview of subjective memory decline changes, relative to objective memory 
performances, and of their relationships with neurodegeneration, across the 
clinical continuum of Alzheimer's disease. Two hundred participants from the 
Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à un stade Précoce (IMAP+) 
primary cohort and 731 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) replication cohort were included. They were divided into four 
clinical groups (Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à un stade 
Précoce/Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative): controls (n = 67/147, age: 
60-84/60-90, female: 54/55%), patients with subjective cognitive decline 
(n = 30/84, age: 54-84/65-80, female: 44/63%), mild cognitive impairment 
(n = 50/369, age: 58-86/55-88, female: 45/44%) or Alzheimer's-type dementia 
(n = 36/121, age: 51-86/61-90, female: 41/41%). Subjective and objective memory 
scores, and their difference (i.e. delta score reflecting memory awareness), 
were compared between groups. Then, voxelwise relationships between subjective 
memory decline and neuroimaging measures of neurodegeneration [atrophy (T1-MRI) 
and hypometabolism (18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET)] were assessed across clinical 
groups and the interactive effect of the level of cognitive impairment within 
the entire sample was assessed. Analyses were adjusted for age, sex and 
education, and repeated including only the amyloid-positive participants. In 
Imagerie Multimodale de la maladie d'Alzheimer à un stade Précoce, the level of 
subjective memory decline was higher in all patient groups (all P < 0.001) 
relative to controls, but similar between patient groups. In contrast, objective 
memory deficits progressively worsened from the subjective cognitive decline to 
the dementia group (all P < 0.001). Accordingly, the delta score showed a 
progressive decline in memory awareness across clinical groups (all P < 0.001). 
Voxelwise analyses revealed opposite relationships between the subjective memory 
decline score and neurodegeneration across the clinical continuum. In the 
earliest stages (i.e. patients with subjective cognitive decline or Mini Mental 
State Examination > 28), greater subjective memory decline was associated with 
increased neurodegeneration, while in later stages (i.e. patients with mild 
cognitive impairment, dementia or Mini Mental State Examination < 27) a lower 
score was related to more neurodegeneration. Similar findings were recovered in 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative replication cohort, with slight 
differences according to the clinical group, and in the amyloid-positive 
subsamples. Altogether, our findings suggest that the subjective memory decline 
score should be interpreted differently from normal cognition to dementia. 
Higher scores might reflect greater neurodegeneration in earliest stages, while 
in more advanced stages lower scores might reflect decreased memory awareness, 
i.e. more anosognosia associated with advanced neurodegeneration.

© The Author(s) (2021). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcab199
PMCID: PMC8421692
PMID: 34704027


52. Front Neurosci. 2019 May 15;13:455. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00455. eCollection 
2019.

TREML2 Mutation Mediate Alzheimer's Disease Risk by Altering Neuronal 
Degeneration.

Song YN(1), Li JQ(1), Tan CC(1), Wang HF(1), Tan MS(1), Cao XP(2), Yu JT(1)(2), 
Tan L(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

A coding missense mutation (rs3747742) in triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cell-like 2 (TREML2) has been recently proposed as an important 
protective factor against Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the link between 
TREML2 and AD pathology remains unclear. Therefore, we explored the association 
of TREML2 rs3747742 with cognitive function, neuroimaging biomarkers and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers related to AD, including CSF total-tau 
(T-tau), phosphor-tau (P-tau), and amyloid-β (Aβ1-42). As for cognitive 
function, related cognitive scores of Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes 
(CDRSB), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive section 11 (ADAS-cog 
11), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and Rey Auditory-Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) were extracted. We used a multiple linear regression model to examine 
the association of TREML2 rs3747742 with the baseline variables. Furthermore, we 
also calculated the change rate of above variables influenced by TREML2 
rs3747742 via applying a mixed-effects model over a 4-year follow-up. In this 
analysis, a total of 1,306 individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database were included. Finally, we observed that only in AD 
patients, but not in normal controls or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
individuals, TREML2 rs3747742 exhibited a strong association with CSF total-tau 
levels at baseline (β = -22.1210, p = 0.0166) and 4-year follow-up (β = -0.3961, 
p = 0.0115). Furthermore, no associations were found with CSF Aβ1-42 levels, 
P-tau levels, neuroimaging biomarkers and cognitive function neither for 
baseline variables nor for longitudinal data. Thus, this study indicated that 
TREML2 mediated the risk of AD through influencing AD-related neurodegeneration 
(abnormal T-tau levels) but not P-tau levels and Aβ pathology.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00455
PMCID: PMC6529571
PMID: 31156362


53. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Apr 27;13:667899. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.667899. 
eCollection 2021.

The Effects of CSF Neurogranin and APOE ε4 on Cognition and Neuropathology in 
Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Fan Y, Gao Y, Therriault J, Luo J, Ba M, Zhang H; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measurements of neurogranin (Ng) have emerged as a 
promising biomarker for cognitive decline in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The apolipoprotein E ε4 (APOE ε4) allele is by far the 
most consistent genetic risk factor for AD. However, it is not known whether the 
pathophysiological roles of Ng in MCI or AD are related to APOEε4. We stratified 
250 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database into cognitively normal (CN) ε4 negative (CN ε4-), CN ε4 positive (CN 
ε4+), MCI ε4 negative (MCI ε4-), MCI ε4 positive (MCI ε4+), AD ε4 negative (AD 
ε4-), and AD ε4 positive (AD ε4+). CSF Ng levels were significantly increased in 
APOE ε4 carriers compared to APOE ε4 non-carriers with MCI. In addition, CSF Ng 
identified MCI ε4+ versus CN ε4-, but not MCI ε4- versus CN ε4-. Similarly, CSF 
Ng negatively correlated with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores at 
baseline in the MCI ε4+ group. Our findings support the use of CSF Ng as a 
biomarker of synaptic pathology for AD. We propose that the roles of CSF Ng in 
the pathophysiology of MCI may be related to APOE ε4.

Copyright © 2021 Fan, Gao, Therriault, Luo, Ba and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.667899
PMCID: PMC8110906
PMID: 33986657

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


54. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2021 Sep;208:106282. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106282. Epub 2021 Jul 22.

Early Alzheimer's disease diagnosis with the contrastive loss using paired 
structural MRIs.

Qiao H(1), Chen L(2), Ye Z(3), Zhu F(4).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
BeiJing 100049, China. Electronic address: qiaohezhe@cigit.ac.cn.
(2)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: chenlin@cigit.ac.cn.
(3)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, United States of America. 
Electronic address: zye16@jh.edu.
(4)Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chongqing 400714, China. Electronic address: zhufan@cigit.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is a chronic and fatal 
neurodegenerative disease with progressive impairment of memory. Brain 
structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) has been widely applied as 
important biomarkers of AD. Various machine learning approaches, especially deep 
learning-based models, have been proposed for the early diagnosis of AD and 
monitoring the disease progression on sMRI data. However, the requirement for a 
large number of training images still hinders the extensive usage of AD 
diagnosis. In addition, due to the similarities in human whole-brain structure, 
finding the subtle brain changes is essential to extract discriminative features 
from limited sMRI data effectively.
METHODS: In this work, we proposed two types of contrastive losses with paired 
sMRIs to promote the diagnostic performance using group categories (G-CAT) and 
varying subject mini-mental state examination (S-MMSE) information, 
respectively. Specifically, G-CAT contrastive loss layer was used to learn the 
closer feature representation from sMRIs with the same categories, while ranking 
information from S-MMSE assists the model to explore subtle changes between 
individuals.
RESULTS: The model was trained on ADNI-1. Comparison with baseline methods was 
performed on MIRIAD and ADNI-2. For the classification task on MIRIAD, S-MMSE 
achieves 93.5% of accuracy, 96.6% of sensitivity, and 94.9% of specificity, 
respectively. G-CAT and S-MMSE both reach remarkable performance in terms of 
classification sensitivity and specificity respectively. Comparing with 
state-of-the-art methods, we found this proposed method could achieve comparable 
results with other approaches.
CONCLUSION: The proposed model could extract discriminative features under 
whole-brain similarity. Extensive experiments also support the accuracy of this 
model, i.e., it provides better ability to identify uncertain samples, 
especially for the classification task of subjects with MMSE in 22-27. Source 
code is freely available at https://github.com/fengduqianhe/ADComparative.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2021.106282
PMID: 34343744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
declared no conflict of interests.


55. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2020 May 17;12(1):e12035. doi: 10.1002/dad2.12035. 
eCollection 2020.

High blood pressure predicts hippocampal atrophy rate in cognitively impaired 
elders.

Fiford CM(1), Nicholas JM(2), Biessels GJ(3), Lane CA(1), Cardoso MJ(4)(5), 
Barnes J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Dementia Research Centre UCL 
Institute of Neurology London UK.
(2)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine London UK.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery Brain Center Rudolf Magnus 
University Medical Center Utrecht the Netherlands.
(4)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences King's College London 
London UK.
(5)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering University College 
London London UK.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding relationships among blood pressure (BP), cognition, 
and brain volume could inform Alzheimer's disease (AD) management.
METHODS: We investigated Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
participants: 200 controls, 346 mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 154 AD. 
National Alzheimer's Co-ordinating Center (NACC) participants were separately 
analyzed: 1098 controls, 2297 MCI, and 4845 AD. Relationships between cognition 
and BP were assessed in both cohorts and BP and atrophy rates in ADNI. 
Multivariate mixed linear-regression models were fitted with joint outcomes of 
BP (systolic, diastolic, and pulse pressure), cognition (Mini-Mental State 
Examination, Logical Memory, and Digit Symbol) and atrophy rate (whole-brain, 
hippocampus).
RESULTS: ADNI MCI and AD patients with greater baseline systolic BP had higher 
hippocampal atrophy rates ([r, P value]; 0.2, 0.005 and 0.2, 0.04, 
respectively). NACC AD patients with lower systolic BP had lower cognitive 
scores (0.1, 0.0003).
DISCUSSION: Higher late-life BP may be associated with faster decline in 
cognitively impaired elders.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease 
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/dad2.12035
PMCID: PMC7308793
PMID: 32587882

Conflict of interest statement: There are no reported conflicts apart from a 
note that Christopher Lane is now employed by Eisai Europe Ltd.


56. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2020 Apr-Jun;34(2):141-147. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0000000000000356.

Association Between Neuropsychiatric Symptom Trajectory and Conversion to 
Alzheimer Disease.

Lo TWB(1)(2), Karameh WK(2)(3)(4), Barfett JJ(2)(5), Fornazzari LR(2), Munoz 
DG(2)(6)(7), Schweizer TA(2)(8)(9)(10)(11), Fischer CE(2)(9)(3); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, University of Toronto Scarborough, Scarborough.
(2)Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Research, Li Ka Shing Knowledge 
Institute.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto.
(4)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Medical Imaging.
(6)Division of Pathology.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology.
(8)Division of Neurosurgery, St. Michael's Hospital.
(9)Institute of Medical Sciences.
(10)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering.
(11)Department of Surgery, Division of Neurosurgery.

INTRODUCTION: Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) are both common in mild cognitive 
impairment and Alzheimer disease (AD). Studies have shown that some NPS such as 
apathy and depression are a key indicator for progression to AD.
METHODS: We compared Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) total score and NPI 
subdomain score between mild cognitive impairment-converters (MCI-C) and mild 
cognitive impairment-nonconverters (MCI-NC) longitudinally for 6 years using the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. In addition to the 
NPI, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores were also compared to find out 
if MMSE scores would differ between different NPI groups. Lastly, a linear 
regression model was done on MMSE and NPI total score to establish a 
relationship between MMSE and NPI total score.
RESULTS: The results in this study showed that NPI total scores between MCI-C 
and MCI-NC differed significantly throughout 6 years. MCI-C subjects had a 
higher mean NPI total score and lower MMSE score compared with MCI-NC subjects. 
In addition, MMSE scores were significantly different between the 3 groups of 
NPI total score. Subjects who have a high NPI score have the lowest mean MMSE 
score, thus demonstrating that NPI scores do indeed affect MMSE scores. Further 
analyses using a regression model revealed that a unit change in NPI total score 
lead to 0.1 to 0.3 decrease in MMSE.
DISCUSSION: On the basis of the findings, this study showed evidence that 
increase in NPS burden (reflected by increase in NPI) over time predicts 
conversion to AD, whereas stability of symptoms (reflected by stable NPI score) 
favors nonconversion. Further study should investigate the underlying mechanisms 
that drive both NPS burden and cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0000000000000356
PMID: 31633557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Front Neurosci. 2023 Mar 2;17:1089134. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1089134. 
eCollection 2023.

Individualized network analysis: A novel approach to investigate tau PET using 
graph theory in the Alzheimer's disease continuum.

Protas H(1)(2), Ghisays V(1)(2), Goradia DD(1)(2), Bauer R 3rd(1)(2), Devadas 
V(1)(2), Chen K(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Reiman EM(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Su Y(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States.
(2)Arizona Alzheimer's Consortium, Phoenix, AZ, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United 
States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United 
States.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, 
Biostatistical Core, School of Mathematics and Statistics, College of Health 
Solutions, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States.
(6)Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Tau PET imaging has emerged as an important tool to detect and 
monitor tangle burden in vivo in the study of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Previous 
studies demonstrated the association of tau burden with cognitive decline in 
probable AD cohorts. This study introduces a novel approach to analyze tau PET 
data by constructing individualized tau network structure and deriving its graph 
theory-based measures. We hypothesize that the network- based measures are a 
measure of the total tau load and the stage through disease.
METHODS: Using tau PET data from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative from 369 
participants, we determine the network measures, global efficiency, global 
strength, and limbic strength, and compare with two regional measures entorhinal 
and tau composite SUVR, in the ability to differentiate, cognitively unimpaired 
(CU), MCI and AD. We also investigate the correlation of these network and 
regional measures and a measure of memory performance, auditory verbal learning 
test for long-term recall memory (AVLT-LTM). Finally, we determine the stages 
based on global efficiency and limbic strength using conditional inference trees 
and compare with Braak staging.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that the derived network measures are able to 
differentiate three clinical stages of AD, CU, MCI, and AD. We also demonstrate 
that these network measures are strongly correlated with memory performance 
overall. Unlike regional tau measurements, the tau network measures were 
significantly associated with AVLT-LTM even in cognitively unimpaired 
individuals. Stages determined from global efficiency and limbic strength, 
visually resembled Braak staging.
DISCUSSION: The strong correlations with memory particularly in CU suggest the 
proposed technique may be used to characterize subtle early tau accumulation. 
Further investigation is ongoing to examine this technique in a longitudinal 
setting.

Copyright © 2023 Protas, Ghisays, Goradia, Bauer, Devadas, Chen, Reiman and Su.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1089134
PMCID: PMC10017746
PMID: 36937677

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


58. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;110:102-13. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.01.003. Epub 
2013 Apr 8.

Diagnosis and management of Alzheimer's disease: past, present and future 
ethical issues.

Gauthier S(1), Leuzy A, Racine E, Rosa-Neto P.

Author information:
(1)McGill Center for Studies in Aging, Douglas Mental Health Research Institute, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada. Electronic address: serge.gauthier@mcgill.ca.

There is great interest in the ethical issues associated with Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and related dementias given the prevalence of AD and the evolving 
neuroscience landscape in matters of diagnoses and therapeutics. Much of the 
ethics discussion arises in the tension between the principle of not doing harm 
(principle of non-maleficence) in this vulnerable population and the development 
of effective treatments (principle of beneficence). Autonomy and capacity issues 
are also numerous, wide-ranging, and concern (1) day to day affairs such as 
driving safely and spending money wisely, (2) life-time events such as 
designating a legal representative in case of incapacity, making a will, (3) 
consenting to treatment and diagnostic procedures, (4) participating in 
research. The latter issue is particularly thorny and illustrates well the 
complexity of tackling concerns related to capacity. The impetus to protect AD 
patients has partly led to ethics regulation and policies making research on 
inapt patients more difficult because of stringent requirements for signed 
informed consent or for showing the value of the research to this specific 
patient population. New issues are arising that relate to earlier diagnosis 
using biomarkers and (possibly soon) the use of drugs that modify disease 
progression. We here summarize and discuss the different ethical issues 
associated with AD from a historical perspective, with emphasis on diagnostic 
and treatments issues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.01.003
PMID: 23578568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2021 Dec 20;111:110393. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2021.110393. Epub 2021 Jul 2.

Genome-wide association study identified INSC gene associated with Trail Making 
Test Part A and Alzheimer's disease related cognitive phenotypes.

Wang K(1), Xu C(2), Smith A(3), Xiao D(4), Navia RO(5), Lu Y(6), Xie C(7), 
Piamjariyakul U(8); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Health, School of Nursing, Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Electronic address: 
keskeng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Affairs, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX 78520, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, Morsani College of 
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33613, USA.
(4)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA 
02493, USA; Neuroimaging Center, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA 02478, USA; School 
of Arts and Sciences, MCPHS University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine and Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.
(7)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Environmental 
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(8)School of Nursing, Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Trail Making Test (TMT) Part A (TMT-A) is a good measure of 
performance on cognitive processing speed. This study aimed to perform a 
genome-wide association study of TMT-A in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: A total of 757 individuals with TMT-A phenotypes and 620,901 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were extracted from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative 1 (ADNI-1) cohort. AD related cognitive phenotypes 
include TMT-A, TMT-B, Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ), Clinical 
Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB), and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale 13 (ADAS13). Multivariable linear regression analysis 
of TMT-A was conducted using PLINK software. The most TMT-A associated gene was 
tested with Color Trails Test 1 Form A (CTTA), a culturally fair analog of the 
TMT-A. Functional annotation of SNPs was performed using the RegulomeDB and 
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) databases.
RESULTS: The best signal with TMT-A was rs1108010 (p = 4.34 × 10-8) at 11p15.2 
within INSC gene, which was also associated with TMT-B, FAQ, CDR-SB, and ADAS13 
(p = 2.47 × 10-4, 8.56 × 10-3, 0.0127 and 0.0188, respectively). Furthermore, 
suggestive loci were identified such as FOXD2 and CLTA with TMT-A, GBP1/GBP3 
with TMT-B, GRIK2 with FAQ, BAALC and CCDC146 with CDR-SB, BAALC and NKAIN2 with 
ADAS13. Additionally, the best SNP within INSC associated with CTTA was 
rs7931705 (p = 6.15 × 10-5). Several SNPs had significant eQTLs using GTEx.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified several genes/loci associated with TMT-A and AD 
related phenotypes. These findings offer the potential for new insights into the 
pathogenesis of cognitive function and Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2021.110393
PMID: 34224794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Neurobiol Aging. 2022 Apr;112:111-121. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.12.011. Epub 2022 Jan 2.

Predicting Alzheimer's disease with practice effects, APOE genotype and brain 
metabolism.

Oltra-Cucarella J(1), Sánchez-SanSegundo M(2), Ferrer-Cascales R(1); Alzheimer 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Psychology, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain).
(2)Department of Health Psychology, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain). 
Electronic address: miriam.sanchez@ua.es.

After the paper Cognition or genetics. Predicting progression to Alzheimer's 
disease with practice effects, APOE genotype and brain metabolism [Neurobiol 
Aging, 2018; 71:234-240] was published, we identified a coding error of one of 
the variables analyzed. To correct, update and expand the previous work, we 
compared simple and complex regression-based Reliable Change Index (RCIRB) to 
analyze the risk of progression to AD (AD-risk) after six years using either 
delayed recall or recognition scores. Auditory Verbal Learning Test scores at 
six months for 394 individuals with normal cognition from the ADNI were used to 
build the regression. In 816 individuals with amnestic mild cognitive 
impairments, the AD-risk was associated with age, brain metabolism, APOE-ε4, 
recognition hits, the discrimination index, and low practice effects in the 
complex RCIRB only. The complex RCIRB outperformed the simple RCIRB. Small 
correlations were found between practice effects and both Aβ (highest r = 0.218) 
and TAU (highest r = -0.183). RCIRB are computationally simple and provide 
sensitive AD-risk estimates in combination with APOE-ε4 and FDG-PET.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.12.011
PMID: 35121484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;99(3):953-963. doi: 10.3233/JAD-231426.

Simplifying Alzheimer's Disease Monitoring: A Novel Machine-Learning Approach to 
Estimate the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Box Changes Using the Mini-Mental 
State Examination and Functional Activities Questionnaire.

Sato K(1)(2), Niimi Y(2)(3), Ihara R(4), Suzuki K(5), Iwata A(4), Iwatsubo 
T(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Japanese Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Healthcare Economics and Health Policy, Graduate School of 
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Neurology, Internal Medicine, National Defense Medical College, 
Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Primary outcome measure in the clinical trials of disease modifying 
therapy (DMT) drugs for Alzheimer's disease (AD) has often been evaluated by 
Clinical Dementia Rating sum of boxes (CDRSB). However, CDR testing requires 
specialized training and 30-50 minutes to complete, not being suitable for daily 
clinical practice.
OBJECTIVE: Herein, we proposed a machine-learning method to estimate CDRSB 
changes using simpler cognitive/functional batteries (Mini-Mental State 
Examination [MMSE] and Functional Activities Questionnaire [FAQ]), to replace 
CDR testing.
METHODS: Baseline data from 944 ADNI and 171 J-ADNI amyloid-positive 
participants were used to build machine-learning models predicting annualized 
CDRSB changes between visits, based on MMSE and FAQ scores. Prediction 
performance was evaluated with mean absolute error (MAE) and R2 comparing 
predicted to actual rmDeltaCDRSB/rmDeltayear. We further assessed whether 
decline in cognitive function surpassing particular thresholds could be 
identified using the predicted rmDeltaCDRSB/rmDeltayear.
RESULTS: The models achieved the minimum required prediction errors (MAE < 1.0) 
and satisfactory prediction accuracy (R2>0.5) for mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) patients for changes in CDRSB over periods of 18 months or longer. 
Predictions of annualized CDRSB progression>0.5, >1.0, or >1.5 demonstrated a 
consistent performance (i.e., Matthews correlation coefficient>0.5). These 
results were largely replicated in the J-ADNI case predictions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method effectively predicted MCI patient deterioration in the 
CDRSB based solely on MMSE and FAQ scores. It may aid routine practice for 
disease-modifying therapy drug efficacy evaluation, without necessitating CDR 
testing at every visit.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-231426
PMID: 38759009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2022 Dec;227:107191. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.107191. Epub 2022 Oct 27.

Brain-on-Cloud for automatic diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease from 3D structural 
magnetic resonance whole-brain scans.

Tomassini S(1), Sbrollini A(2), Covella G(3), Sernani P(4), Falcionelli N(5), 
Müller H(6), Morettini M(7), Burattini L(8), Dragoni AF(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
s.tomassini@pm.univpm.it.
(2)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
a.sbrollini@staff.univpm.it.
(3)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
g.covella@studenti.univpm.it.
(4)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
p.sernani@staff.univpm.it.
(5)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
n.falcionelli@staff.univpm.it.
(6)Information Systems Institute, University of Applied Sciences Western 
Switzerland (HES-SO), Sierre, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
henning.mueller@hevs.ch.
(7)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
m.morettini@univpm.it.
(8)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
l.burattini@univpm.it.
(9)Department of Information Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche (UnivPM), Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
a.f.dragoni@univpm.it.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease accounts for approximately 70% of 
all dementia cases. Cortical and hippocampal atrophy caused by Alzheimer's 
disease can be appreciated easily from a T1-weighted structural magnetic 
resonance scan. Since a timely therapeutic intervention during the initial 
stages of the syndrome has a positive impact on both disease progression and 
quality of life of affected subjects, Alzheimer's disease diagnosis is crucial. 
Thus, this study relies on the development of a robust yet lightweight 3D 
framework, Brain-on-Cloud, dedicated to efficient learning of Alzheimer's 
disease-related features from 3D structural magnetic resonance whole-brain scans 
by improving our recent convolutional long short-term memory-based framework 
with the integration of a set of data handling techniques in addition to the 
tuning of the model hyper-parameters and the evaluation of its diagnostic 
performance on independent test data.
METHODS: For this objective, four serial experiments were conducted on a 
scalable GPU cloud service. They were compared and the hyper-parameters of the 
best experiment were tuned until reaching the best-performing configuration. In 
parallel, two branches were designed. In the first branch of Brain-on-Cloud, 
training, validation and testing were performed on OASIS-3. In the second 
branch, unenhanced data from ADNI-2 were employed as independent test set, and 
the diagnostic performance of Brain-on-Cloud was evaluated to prove its 
robustness and generalization capability. The prediction scores were computed 
for each subject and stratified according to age, sex and mini mental state 
examination.
RESULTS: In its best guise, Brain-on-Cloud is able to discriminate Alzheimer's 
disease with an accuracy of 92% and 76%, sensitivity of 94% and 82%, and area 
under the curve of 96% and 92% on OASIS-3 and independent ADNI-2 test data, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain-on-Cloud shows to be a reliable, lightweight and 
easily-reproducible framework for automatic diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease 
from 3D structural magnetic resonance whole-brain scans, performing well without 
segmenting the brain into its portions. Preserving the brain anatomy, its 
application and diagnostic ability can be extended to other cognitive disorders. 
Due to its cloud nature, computational lightness and fast execution, it can also 
be applied in real-time diagnostic scenarios providing prompt clinical decision 
support.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.107191
PMID: 36335750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
affirm that this manuscript is an honest, accurate and transparent account of 
the study being reported, that no important aspects of the study have been 
omitted, and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, 
registered) have been explained. The authors declare no relationships with other 
people or organizations that could inappropriately bias the work. The authors 
confirm that neither the manuscript nor any parts of its content are currently 
under consideration or published elsewhere in any language.


63. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Feb 25;13:638922. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.638922. 
eCollection 2021.

TNFRSF1B Gene Variants and Related Soluble TNFR2 Levels Impact Resilience in 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Pillai JA(1)(2)(3), Bebek G(4)(5), Khrestian M(6)(7), Bena J(8), Bergmann CC(7), 
Bush WS(9), Leverenz JB(1)(2)(3), Bekris LM(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(2)Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United 
States.
(3)Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(4)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, United States.
(5)Department of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
United States.
(6)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, United States.
(8)Department of Quantitative Health Science, Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(9)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States.

Tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNFR2) promotes neuronal survival downstream. 
This longitudinal study evaluated whether the TNFRSF1B gene encoding TNFR2 and 
levels of its soluble form (sTNFR2) affect Alzheimer disease (AD) biomarkers and 
clinical outcomes. Data analyzed included 188 patients in the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) who had mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
and AD dementia. Further, a replication study was performed in 48 patients with 
MCI with positive AD biomarkers who were treated at a memory clinic. 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sTNFR2 levels along with two related TNFRSF1B gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs976881 and rs1061622 were assessed. 
General linear models were used to evaluate the effect of CSF sTNFR2 levels and 
each SNP in relationship to CSF t-tau and p-tau, cognitive domains, MRI brain 
measures, and longitudinal cognitive changes after adjustments were made for 
covariates such as APOE ε4 status. In the ADNI cohort, a significant interaction 
between rs976881 and CSF sTNFR2 modulates CSF t-tau and p-tau levels; 
hippocampal and whole brain volumes; and Digit Span Forwards subtest scores. In 
the replication cohort, a significant interaction between rs976881 and CSF 
sTNFR2 modulates CSF p-tau. A significant interaction between rs976881 and CSF 
sTNFR2 also impacts Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes scores over 12 months 
in the ADNI cohort. The interaction between TNFRSF1B variant rs976881 and CSF 
sTNFR2 levels was noted to modulate multiple AD-associated severity markers and 
cognitive domains. This interaction impacts resilience-related clinical outcomes 
in AD and lends support to sTNFR2 as a promising candidate for therapeutic 
targeting to improve clinical outcomes of interest.

Copyright © 2021 Pillai, Bebek, Khrestian, Bena, Bergmann, Bush, Leverenz and 
Bekris.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.638922
PMCID: PMC7947258
PMID: 33716716

Conflict of interest statement: JP receives research funding from the National 
Institutes of Health, Alzheimer's Association, and Keep Memory Alive Foundation. 
CB receives research funding from the National Institutes of Health. WB receives 
research funding from the National Institutes of Health. JL has received 
consulting fees from Acadia, Aptnyx, Biogen, Eisai, GE Healthcare, Sanofi, and 
Takeda and grant support from the Alzheimer's Association, Alzheimer's Drug 
Discovery Foundation, Biogen, Department of Defense, GE Healthcare, 
Genzyme/Sanofi, Lewy Body Dementia Association, Michael J Fox Foundation, and 
National Institute of Health (NIA, NINDS). The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


64. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;70(3):877-887. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180962.

Investigating the Association Between Verbal Forgetting and Pathological Markers 
of Alzheimer's and Lewy Body Diseases.

Schaeffer MJ(1), Callahan BL(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Mathison Centre for Mental Health Research & Education, Calgary, AB, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The percentage of verbal forgetting (VF%) measure of the Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) has been proposed to differentiate 
patients diagnosed clinically with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB).
OBJECTIVE: To determine if VF% aligns with gold-standard biomarker and autopsy 
evidence of AD and DLB neuropathology.
METHODS: Clinical, cognitive, sociodemographic, and biomarker data were 
collected from 315 patients with baseline cognitive impairment and 485 normal 
controls from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). AD markers 
included reduced cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) amyloid-β, elevated total-tau and 
phosphorylated-tau, hippocampal atrophy, and the presence of amyloid plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles at autopsy. DLB markers included reduced CSF 
α-synuclein, preserved hippocampus, atrophied putamen, occipital glucose 
metabolism, and the presence of Lewy bodies at autopsy. Cognitively impaired 
participants were classified as ADVF% (n = 190) or DLBVF% (n = 125) based on 
their RAVLT VF% scores using a 75% cut-off (≥75%  = ADVF%, <75%  = DLBVF%). 
Postmortem data were available for 13 ADVF% participants, 13 DLBVF% patients, 
and six healthy controls.
RESULTS: ADVF% and DLBVF% participants did not differ on CSF or neuroimaging 
biomarkers, with the exception of total tau levels which were higher in ADVF%. 
In the subset of participants with autopsy data, comorbid AD and DLB pathology 
was most frequent in ADVF% participants, and pure DLB pathology was most 
frequent in DLBVF% participants, however, these differences were not 
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: The RAVLT VF% measure does not reliably align with AD and DLB 
neuropathology in ADNI participants.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180962
PMID: 31282412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;73(2):759-768. doi: 10.3233/JAD-191005.

Associations of White Matter Hyperintensities with Cognitive Decline: A 
Longitudinal Study.

Wang YL(1), Chen W(1), Cai WJ(2), Hu H(1), Xu W(1), Wang ZT(1), Cao XP(3), Tan 
L(1), Yu JT(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

White matter hyperintensities (WMHs), mainly caused by cerebrovascular injury, 
may lead to cognitive impairment. In order to identify whether the volume of 
WMHs is associated with cognitive decline over years, this longitudinal study 
involved 818 individuals from the ADNI-2 dataset from August 2010 to May 2017. 
Cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of WMHs with 8 cognitive domains 
were explored, using Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA), Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDRSB), Alzheimer 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-Cog13), Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test (RAVLT), Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), executive function 
(ADNI-EF), and memory function (ADNI-Mem). The association analyses were 
performed using multiple linear regression models, linear mixed models, Spearman 
rank correlation, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves. The volumes of WMHs were 
greater in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia compared with 
controls (p < 0.001) and mild cognitive impairment (p = 0.006) patients at 
baseline. The bigger volumes of WMHs correlated with worse performances on 
ADAS-Cog13 and ADNI-EF (p = 0.029; p = 0.003) at baseline and MMSE, MoCA, CDRSB, 
ADAS-Cog13, FAQ, and ADNI-Mem (overall p < 0.05) longitudinally, after adjusting 
for age, sex, educational level, apolipoprotein E ɛ4 genotype, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, diabetes, smoking, infarction, and diagnosis. Additionally, the 
correlations between the change rate of WMHs and change rates of MMSE, MoCA, 
CDRSB, FAQ, ADNI-EF, and ADNI-Mem were statistically significant. Furthermore, 
patients with high WMH volumes showed an increased likelihood of dementia. The 
results of the study suggest that WMH volume is associated with cognitive 
decline, and it contributes to the conversion to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-191005
PMID: 31839612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Nov 20;9:378. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00378. 
eCollection 2017.

Decreased Complexity in Alzheimer's Disease: Resting-State fMRI Evidence of 
Brain Entropy Mapping.

Wang B(1)(2), Niu Y(1), Miao L(1), Cao R(1), Yan P(1), Guo H(1), Li D(1), Guo 
Y(1), Yan T(3)(4), Wu J(5)(6), Xiang J(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science and Technology, Taiyuan University of Technology, 
Taiyuan, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(3)School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Convergence Medical Engineering System and Healthcare 
Technology, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Beijing Institute 
of Technology, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Biomimetic Robots and Systems, Ministry of Education, 
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
(6)Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, 
Okayama, Japan.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a frequently observed, irreversible brain function 
disorder among elderly individuals. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (rs-fMRI) has been introduced as an alternative approach to assessing 
brain functional abnormalities in AD patients. However, alterations in the brain 
rs-fMRI signal complexities in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD patients 
remain unclear. Here, we described the novel application of permutation entropy 
(PE) to investigate the abnormal complexity of rs-fMRI signals in MCI and AD 
patients. The rs-fMRI signals of 30 normal controls (NCs), 33 early MCI (EMCI), 
32 late MCI (LMCI), and 29 AD patients were obtained from the Alzheimer's 
disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. After preprocessing, 
whole-brain entropy maps of the four groups were extracted and subjected to 
Gaussian smoothing. We performed a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the 
brain entropy maps of the four groups. The results after adjusting for age and 
sex differences together revealed that the patients with AD exhibited lower 
complexity than did the MCI and NC controls. We found five clusters that 
exhibited significant differences and were distributed primarily in the 
occipital, frontal, and temporal lobes. The average PE of the five clusters 
exhibited a decreasing trend from MCI to AD. The AD group exhibited the least 
complexity. Additionally, the average PE of the five clusters was significantly 
positively correlated with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores and 
significantly negatively correlated with Functional Assessment Questionnaire 
(FAQ) scores and global Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scores in the patient 
groups. Significant correlations were also found between the PE and regional 
homogeneity (ReHo) in the patient groups. These results indicated that declines 
in PE might be related to changes in regional functional homogeneity in AD. 
These findings suggested that complexity analyses using PE in rs-fMRI signals 
can provide important information about the fMRI characteristics of cognitive 
impairments in MCI and AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00378
PMCID: PMC5701971
PMID: 29209199


67. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2023;10(2):212-222. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2023.13.

Longitudinal Exposure-Response Modeling of Multiple Indicators of Alzheimer's 
Disease Progression.

Polhamus DG(1), Dolton MJ, Rogers JA, Honigberg L, Jin JY, Quartino A.

Author information:
(1)Michael J. Dolton, Roche Products Pty Limited, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 
Telephone: +612 9454 9000; Email: michael.dolton@roche.com.

BACKGROUND: Progression in Alzheimer's disease manifests as changes in multiple 
biomarker, cognitive, and functional endpoints. Disease progression modeling can 
be used to integrate these multiple measures into a synthesized metric of where 
a patient lies within the disease spectrum, allowing for a more dynamic measure 
over the range of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to combine modeling techniques from psychometric 
research (e.g., item response theory) and pharmacometrics (e.g., hierarchical 
models) to describe the multivariate longitudinal disease progression for 
patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. Additionally, we aimed to 
extend the subsequent model to make it suitable for clinical trial simulation, 
with the inclusion of covariates, to explain variability in latent progression 
(i.e., disease progression) and to aid in the assessment of enrichment 
strategies.
DESIGN: Multiple longitudinal endpoints in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative database were modeled. This model was validated internally using 
visual predictive checks, and externally by comparing data from the placebo arms 
of two Phase 2 crenezumab studies, ABBY (NCT01343966) and BLAZE (NCT01397578).
SETTING: The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative began in 2004: the 
initial 5-year study (ADNI-1) was extended by 2 years in 2009 by a Grand 
Opportunities grant (ADNI-GO), and in 2011 and 2016 by further competitive 
renewals of the ADNI-1 grant (ADNI-2 and ADNI-3, respectively). This work 
studies natural progression data from patients with confirmed Alzheimer's 
disease. The Phase 2 ABBY and BLAZE trials evaluated the safety and efficacy of 
crenezumab in patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease.
PARTICIPANTS: From the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database, 305 
subjects who had a baseline diagnosis of mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease 
were included in modeling. From the ABBY and BLAZE studies, 158 patients were 
included from the studies' placebo arms.
MEASUREMENTS: Longitudinal cognitive and functional assessments modeled included 
the Clinical Dementia Rating (both as Sum of Boxes and individual item scores), 
the Mini-Mental State Examination, the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - 
Cognitive Subscale, the Functional Activities Questionnaire, the Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment, and the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test. Also included 
were the imaging variable fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography and 
the following magnetic resonance imaging volumetrics: entorhinal, fusiform, 
hippocampal, intra-cranial, mid-temporal, ventricular, and whole brain.
RESULTS: Applying item response theory approaches in this longitudinal setting 
showed clinical assessments informing a common disease scale in the following 
order (from early disease to late disease): Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, 
Functional Activities Questionnaire, Montreal Cognitive Assessment, Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive Subscale 12, Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum 
of Boxes, and Mini-Mental State Examination. The Clinical Dementia Rating 
communication and home-and-hobbies items were most informative at earlier 
disease stages, while memory, orientation, and personal care informed the 
disease status at later stages. A clinical trial simulation model was developed 
and accurately described within-sample longitudinal distribution of endpoints. 
Simplifying the model to use only baseline age, MMSE, and APOEε4 status as 
predictors, out-of-sample mean progression of ADAS-Cog and CDR Sum of Boxes in 
the ABBY and BLAZE placebo arms was accurately described; however, the 
variability in these endpoints was underpredicted and suggests possibility for 
further model refinement when extrapolating from the ADNI sample to trial data. 
Clinical trial simulations were performed to exemplify use of the model to 
investigate hypothetical disease modification effects on the multivariate, 
longitudinal progression on the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale - Cognitive 
Subscale and the Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes.
CONCLUSIONS: The latent variable structure of item response theory can be 
extended to capture a variety of scales that are common assessments and 
indicators of disease status in mild-to-moderate Alzheimer's disease. These 
models are not intended to support causal inferences, but they do successfully 
characterize the observed correlation between endpoints over time and result in 
concise numerical indices of disease status that reflect the totality of 
evidence from considering the endpoints jointly. As such, the models have 
utility for a variety of tasks in clinical trial design, including simulation of 
hypothetical drug effects, interpolation of missing data, and assessment of 
in-sample information.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2023.13
PMID: 36946448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DGP and JAR are employees of the Metrum Research 
group. MJD was an employee of Genentech, Inc., a member of the Roche Group, at 
the time of this work; he is now an employee of Roche Products Pty Limited, 
Sydney, Australia, and owns stock or stock options in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. 
LAH and JYJ are employees of Genentech and own stock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche 
Ltd. AQ was an employee of Genentech, Inc. and owned stock in Roche Holding Ltd 
at the time of this study; she is now an employee of AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.


68. Neurology. 2022 Mar 1;98(9):e958-e967. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000013228. Epub 
2021 Dec 22.

Association of CSF Aβ(38) Levels With Risk of Alzheimer Disease-Related Decline.

Cullen N(1), Janelidze S(2), Palmqvist S(2), Stomrud E(2), Mattsson-Carlgren 
N(2), Hansson O(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Clinical Memory Research Unit (N.C., S.J., S.P., E.S., N.M.-C., 
O.H.), Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Faculty of Medicine, and 
Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine (N.M.-C.), Lund University; Memory 
Clinic (S.P., E.S., O.H.), Skåne University Hospital, Malmö; and Department of 
Neurology (N.M.-C.), Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
nicholas.cullen@med.lu.se.
(2)From the Clinical Memory Research Unit (N.C., S.J., S.P., E.S., N.M.-C., 
O.H.), Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Faculty of Medicine, and 
Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine (N.M.-C.), Lund University; Memory 
Clinic (S.P., E.S., O.H.), Skåne University Hospital, Malmö; and Department of 
Neurology (N.M.-C.), Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Experimental studies suggest that the balance between 
short and long β-amyloid (Aβ) species might modulate the toxic effects of Aβ in 
Alzheimer disease (AD), but clinical evidence is lacking. We studied whether 
Aβ38 levels in CSF relate to risk of AD dementia and cognitive decline.
METHODS: CSF Aβ38 levels were measured in 656 individuals across 2 clinical 
cohorts: the Swedish BioFINDER study and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Cox regression models were used to evaluate the association 
between baseline Aβ38 levels and risk of AD dementia in AD biomarker-positive 
individuals (AD+; determined by CSF phosphorylated tau [P-tau]/Aβ42 ratio) with 
subjective cognitive decline (SCD) or mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Linear 
mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the association between baseline Aβ38 
levels and cognitive decline as measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) in AD+ participants with SCD, MCI, or AD dementia.
RESULTS: In the BioFINDER cohort, high Aβ38 levels were associated with slower 
decline in MMSE score (β = 0.30 points per SD, p = 0.001) and with lower risk of 
conversion to AD dementia (hazard ratio 0.83 per SD, p = 0.03). In the ADNI 
cohort, higher Aβ38 levels were associated with less decline in MMSE score (β = 
0.27, p = 0.01) but not risk of conversion to AD dementia (p = 0.66). Aβ38 
levels in both cohorts were significantly associated with both cognitive and 
clinical outcomes when further adjusted for CSF P-tau or CSF Aβ42 levels.
DISCUSSION: Higher CSF Aβ38 levels are associated with lower risk of AD-related 
changes in 2 independent clinical cohorts. These findings suggest that 
γ-secretase modulators could be effective as disease-altering therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION INFORMATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03174938.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000013228
PMCID: PMC8901176
PMID: 34937781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Front Psychiatry. 2020 Jan 14;10:953. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00953. eCollection 
2019.

A Biomarker for Alzheimer's Disease Based on Patterns of Regional Brain Atrophy.

Frenzel S(1), Wittfeld K(1)(2), Habes M(3), Klinger-König J(1), Bülow R(4), 
Völzke H(5), Grabe HJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(4)Institute of Diagnostic Radiology and Neuroradiology, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(5)Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany.

Introduction: It has been shown that Alzheimer's disease (AD) is accompanied by 
marked structural brain changes that can be detected several years before 
clinical diagnosis via structural magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. In this 
study, we developed a structural MR-based biomarker for in vivo detection of AD 
using a supervised machine learning approach. Based on an individual's pattern 
of brain atrophy a continuous AD score is assigned which measures the similarity 
with brain atrophy patterns seen in clinical cases of AD. Methods: The 
underlying statistical model was trained with MR scans of patients and healthy 
controls from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI-1 
screening). Validation was performed within ADNI-1 and in an independent patient 
sample from the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS-1). In addition, 
our analyses included data from a large general population sample of the Study 
of Health in Pomerania (SHIP-Trend). Results: Based on the proposed AD score we 
were able to differentiate patients from healthy controls in ADNI-1 and OASIS-1 
with an accuracy of 89% (AUC = 95%) and 87% (AUC = 93%), respectively. Moreover, 
we found the AD score to be significantly associated with cognitive functioning 
as assessed by the Mini-Mental State Examination in the OASIS-1 sample after 
correcting for diagnosis, age, sex, age·sex, and total intracranial volume 
(Cohen's f2 = 0.13). Additional analyses showed that the prediction accuracy of 
AD status based on both the AD score and the MMSE score is significantly higher 
than when using just one of them. In SHIP-Trend we found the AD score to be 
weakly but significantly associated with a test of verbal memory consisting of 
an immediate and a delayed word list recall (again after correcting for age, 
sex, age·sex, and total intracranial volume, Cohen's f2 = 0.009). This 
association was mainly driven by the immediate recall performance. Discussion: 
In summary, our proposed biomarker well differentiated between patients and 
healthy controls in an independent test sample. It was associated with measures 
of cognitive functioning both in a patient sample and a general population 
sample. Our approach might be useful for defining robust MR-based biomarkers for 
other neurodegenerative diseases, too.

Copyright © 2020 Frenzel, Wittfeld, Habes, Klinger-König, Bülow, Völzke and 
Grabe.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00953
PMCID: PMC6970941
PMID: 31992998


70. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2022 Jul;2022:979-985. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC48229.2022.9870882.

Spatio-temporal Tensor Multi-Task Learning for Predicting Alzheimer's Disease in 
a Longitudinal study.

Zhang Y, Zhou M, Liu T, Lanfranchi V, Yang P.

The utilisation of machine learning techniques to predict Alzheimer's Disease 
(AD) progression will substantially assist researchers and clinicians in 
establishing effective AD prevention and treatment strategies. In this research, 
we present a novel Multi-Task Learning (MTL) model for modelling AD progression 
based on tensor formation from spatio-temporal similarity measures of brain 
biomarkers. In this model, each patient sample's prediction in the tensor is 
assigned to a task, with each task sharing a set of latent factors acquired via 
tensor decomposition. To further improve the performance of the model, we 
present a novel regularisation term which utilises the convex combination of 
disease progression to modify longitudinal stability and ensure that two 
regression models have a minimal variation at successive time points. The model 
can be utilised to effectively predict AD progression with magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) data and cognitive scores of AD patients at various stages. We 
conducted extensive experiments to evaluate the performance for the proposed 
model and algorithm utilising data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). Compared to single-task and state-of-the-art multi-task 
regression techniques, our proposed method has greater accuracy and stability 
for predicting AD progress in terms of root mean square error, with an average 
reduction of 2.60 compared to single-task regression methods and 1.17 compared 
to multi-task regression methods in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
questionnaire; with an average reduction of 5.08 compared to single-task 
regression methods and 2.71 compared to multi-task regression methods in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog).

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC48229.2022.9870882
PMID: 36086566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Alzheimers Dement. 2024 Dec;20(12):8625-8638. doi: 10.1002/alz.14305. Epub 2024 
Oct 17.

Individualized, cross-validated prediction of future dementia using cognitive 
assessments in people with mild cognitive symptoms.

Borland E(1)(2), Mattson-Carlgren N(1)(2)(3), Tideman P(1)(4); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Stomrud E(1)(4), Hansson O(1)(4), Palmqvist 
S(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, 
Faculty of Medicine at Lund University, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg Center for Molecular Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: We aimed to develop an algorithm to predict the individualized 
risk of future dementia using brief cognitive tests suitable for primary care.
METHODS: We included 612 participants with subjective cognitive decline (SCD) or 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) study, assessed for at least 4 years or until progression to 
dementia. A logistic regression model, using cognitive tests as predictors and 
dementia progression as an outcome, stratified participants into low, 
intermediate, or high risk. A second model, including 1-year cognitive test 
changes, was applied to the intermediate group. The models were replicated in 
392 SCD/MCI participants from the BioFINDER-1 study.
RESULTS: The best two-step model for predicting dementia incorporated Trail 
Making Test B (attention/executive function), Animal Fluency (verbal fluency), 
Mini-Mental State Examination (global cognition), and 10-word list recall 
(memory). The model's positive predictive value in ADNI was 85.8% and negative 
predictive value was 92.2% versus 62.5% and 95.6%, respectively, in BioFINDER-1.
DISCUSSION: This two-step model accurately predicts individualized dementia 
risk.
HIGHLIGHTS: To our knowledge, this is the first algorithm for predicting 
all-cause dementia using a novel two-step model utilizing brief cognitive tests. 
Applying a validated model including the Trail Making Test B, Animal Fluency, 
MMSE, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale delayed, and immediate recall can 
robustly and accurately categorize individuals into low, intermediate, or high 
risk of dementia progression and can facilitate clinical decision-making and 
personalized patient care. We created an app that is available for research and 
educational purposes at https://brainapps.shinyapps.io/PredictAllCauseDementia 
to provide an individualized risk score for dementia progression.

© 2024 The Author(s). Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.14305
PMCID: PMC11667515
PMID: 39417379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Emma Borland, Erik Stomrud, and Pontus Tideman 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Niklas Mattson‐Carlgren has a 
consulting agreement with Biogen. Oskar Hansson has acquired research support 
(for the institution) from ADx, AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, 
Eisai, Fujirebio, GE Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche. In the past 2 years, he has 
received consultancy/speaker fees from AC Immune, Alzpath, BioArctic, Biogen, 
Bristol Meyer Squibb, Cerveau, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Fujirebio, Merck, Novartis, 
Novo Nordisk, Roche, Sanofi, and Siemens. Sebastian Palmqvist receives research 
support (for the institution) from Avid and ki elements/ADDF. In the past 2 
years, he has received consultancy/speaker fees from Bioartic, Biogen, Eisai, 
Eli Lilly, and Roche. Author disclosures are available in the Supporting 
information.


72. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Jul 29;4(7):e419. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.58.

Cerebrospinal fluid markers including trefoil factor 3 are associated with 
neurodegeneration in amyloid-positive individuals.

Paterson RW(1), Bartlett JW(2), Blennow K(3), Fox NC(1); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative; Shaw LM(4), Trojanowski JQ(4), Zetterberg H(5), Schott 
JM(1).

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, 
Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, 
Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, 
Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, 
Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga 
AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, 
Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder 
PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn 
J, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, 
Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen 
R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, 
Chowdhury M, Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, 
Carroll M, Leon S, Householder E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, 
Griffith R, Clark D, Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, Mitsis 
E, deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, 
Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Pogorelec DM, Cerbone B, Michel 
CA, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, 
Wong TZ, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, 
Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein 
BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz 
C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, 
Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, 
Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews 
BR, Herring S, Hunt C, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, Bergman 
H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, 
Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, Mesulam 
MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Turner RS, 
Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, Yesavage J, 
Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, 
Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Hudson L, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, 
Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Santulli RB, Kitzmiller 
TJ, Schwartz ES, Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, 
Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, 
Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, 
Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith 
KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Raudin L, Smith A, Fargher K, Raj BA, Weiner MW, Aisen 
P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, 
Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, 
Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley 
S, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera 
M, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis 
K, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, 
Mintzer J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Jagust W, Landau S, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, 
Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, 
Johnson SC, Fruehling JJ, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage JA, 
Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(2)Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and 
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)1] Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden [2] 
Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

We aimed to identify cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers associated with 
neurodegeneration in individuals with and without CSF evidence of Alzheimer 
pathology. We investigated 287 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) subjects (age=74.9±6.9; 22/48/30% with Alzheimer's disease/mild cognitive 
impairment/controls) with CSF multiplex analyte data and serial volumetric MRI. 
We calculated brain and hippocampal atrophy rates, ventricular expansion and 
Mini Mental State Examination decline. We used false discovery rate corrected 
regression analyses to assess associations between CSF variables and atrophy 
rates in individuals with and without amyloid pathology, adjusting in stages for 
tau, baseline volume, p-tau, age, sex, ApoE4 status and diagnosis. Analytes 
showing statistically significant independent relationships were entered into 
reverse stepwise analyses. Adjusting for tau, baseline volume, p-tau, age, sex 
and ApoE4, 4/83 analytes were significantly independently associated with brain 
atrophy rate, 1/83 with ventricular expansion and 2/83 with hippocampal atrophy. 
The strongest CSF predictor for the three atrophy measures was low trefoil 
factor 3 (TFF3). High cystatin C (CysC) was associated with higher whole brain 
atrophy and hippocampal atrophy rates. Lower levels of vascular endothelial 
growth factor and chromogranin A (CrA) were associated with higher whole brain 
atrophy. In exploratory reverse stepwise analyses, lower TFF3 was associated 
with higher rates of whole brain, hippocampal atrophy and ventricular expansion. 
Lower levels of CrA were associated with higher whole brain atrophy rate. The 
relationship between low TFF3 and increased hippocampal atrophy rate remained 
after adjustment for diagnosis. We identified a series of CSF markers that are 
independently associated with rate of neurodegeneration in amyloid-positive 
individuals. TFF3, a substrate for NOTCH processing may be an important 
biomarker of neurodegeneration across the Alzheimer spectrum.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2014.58
PMCID: PMC4119225
PMID: 25072324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Brain Sci. 2020 Nov 20;10(11):879. doi: 10.3390/brainsci10110879.

Association between Structural Connectivity and Generalized Cognitive Spectrum 
in Alzheimer's Disease.

Lombardi A(1), Amoroso N(1)(2), Diacono D(1), Monaco A(1), Logroscino G(3)(4), 
De Blasi R(5), Bellotti R(1)(6), Tangaro S(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Bari, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Farmacia-Scienze del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di Bari, 
70125 Bari, Italy.
(3)Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Università degli 
Studi di Bari at Pia Fondazione "Card. G. Panico", 73039 Tricase, Italy.
(4)Department of Basic Medicine Neuroscience and Sense Organs, Università degli 
Studi di Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(5)Pia Fondazione "Card. G. Panico", 73039 Tricase, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento Interateneo di Fisica, Università degli Studi di Bari, 70126 
Bari, Italy.
(7)Dipartimento di Scienze del Suolo, della Pianta e degli Alimenti, Università 
degli Studi di Bari, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Modeling disease progression through the cognitive scores has become an 
attractive challenge in the field of computational neuroscience due to its 
importance for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Several scores such 
as Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale cognitive total score, Mini Mental State 
Exam score and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test provide a quantitative 
assessment of the cognitive conditions of the patients and are commonly used as 
objective criteria for clinical diagnosis of dementia and mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI). On the other hand, connectivity patterns extracted from 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) have been successfully used to classify AD and 
MCI subjects with machine learning algorithms proving their potential 
application in the clinical setting. In this work, we carried out a pilot study 
to investigate the strength of association between DTI structural connectivity 
of a mixed ADNI cohort and cognitive spectrum in AD. We developed a machine 
learning framework to find a generalized cognitive score that summarizes the 
different functional domains reflected by each cognitive clinical index and to 
identify the connectivity biomarkers more significantly associated with the 
score. The results indicate that the efficiency and the centrality of some 
regions can effectively track cognitive impairment in AD showing a significant 
correlation with the generalized cognitive score (R = 0.7).

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci10110879
PMCID: PMC7699729
PMID: 33233622

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


74. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;94(2):627-640. doi: 10.3233/JAD-230180.

Detection of Tau-PET Positivity in Clinically Diagnosed Mild Cognitive 
Impairment with Multidimensional Features.

Li B(1), Shi K(1), Ren C(1), Kong M(2), Ba M(1)(3); for Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of Qingdao 
University, Yantai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, Shandong, China.
(3)Yantai Regional Sub Center of National Center for Clinical Medical Research 
of Neurological Diseases, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: The way to evaluate brain tau pathology in vivo is tau positron 
emission tomography (tau-PET) or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. In the 
clinically diagnosed mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a proportion of tau-PET 
are negative. Interest in less expensive and convenient ways to detect tau 
pathology in Alzheimer's disease has increased due to the high cost of tau-PET 
and the invasiveness of lumbar puncture, which typically slows down the cost and 
enrollment of clinical trials.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate one simple and effective method in predicting 
tau-PET status in MCI individuals.
METHODS: The sample included 154 individuals which were dichotomized into 
tau-PET (+) and tau-PET (-) using a cut-off of >1.33. We used stepwise 
regression to select the unitary or combination of variables that best predicted 
tau-PET. The receiver operating characteristic curve was used to assess the 
accuracy of single and multiple clinical markers.
RESULTS: The combined performance of three variables [Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale 13 (ADAS-Cog13), Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE), ADNI-Memory summary score (ADNI-MEM)] in neurocognitive 
measures demonstrated good predictive accuracy of tau-PET status 
[accuracy = 85.7%, area under the curve (AUC) = 0.879]. The combination of 
clinical markers model (APOEɛ4, neurocognitive measures and structural MRI 
imaging of middle temporal) had the best discriminative power (AUC = 0.946).
CONCLUSION: As a noninvasive test, the combination of APOEɛ4, neurocognitive 
measures and structural MRI imaging of middle temporal accurately predicts 
tau-PET status. The finding may provide a non-invasive, cost-effective tool for 
clinical application in predicting tau pathology among MCI individuals.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-230180
PMID: 37334600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Jun 4;10:166. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00166. 
eCollection 2018.

Gender Differences in Elderly With Subjective Cognitive Decline.

Wang L(1)(2)(3), Tian T(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, 
China.

Objective: Subjective cognitive decline (SCD), also known as significant memory 
concern (SMC), has been suggested as a manifestation of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) 
preceding mild cognitive impairment (MCI). This study assessed the impact of 
gender on cognition, amyloid accumulation, the volumes of hippocampus, 
entorhinal cortex (EC), fusiform and medial temporal lobe (MTA) and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pathology biomarkers in patients reporting SMC. 
Methods: Twenty-nine males (mean age ± SD: 72.3 ± 5.7 years) and 40 females 
(mean age ± SD: 71.0 ± 5.1 years) with SMC from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) were included in the study. We explored the gender discrepancies in 
cognition, [18F] AV45 amyloid positivity, volumes of hippocampus, EC, fusiform 
and MTA and CSF biomarkers. Results: Compared with females, males showed 
significantly worse performance in Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 
(ADAS-13; P = 0.004) and lower amyloid deposition (P < 0.001). However, females 
showed greater advantage on the task of Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test-5 
(RAVLT-5) sum (P = 0.021), RAVLT-immediate recall (P = 0.010) and reduced 
volumes of the hippocampus, EC, fusiform and MTA (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 
0.001, P = 0.007) than males. No gender differences were found in CSF Aβ42, CSF 
Tau and CSF P-tau (P = 0.264, P = 0.454, P = 0.353). Conclusions: These findings 
highlight that gender discrepancies should be considered in the interpretation 
of cognitive measures when evaluating SMC.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00166
PMCID: PMC5994539
PMID: 29915534


76. Sci Rep. 2024 Sep 16;14(1):21595. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67389-9.

Progressive cervical cord atrophy parallels cognitive decline in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Emmenegger TM(#)(1), Seiler R(#)(2), Unschuld PG(3)(4), Freund P(#)(5)(6), Klohs 
J(#)(7)(8); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Spinal Cord Injury Center, Balgrist University Hospital, University of 
Zurich, Forchstrasse 340, 8008, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, 
Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Geneva (UniGE), 1205, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(4)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, University Hospitals of Geneva (HUG), 1226, 
Thônex, Switzerland.
(5)Spinal Cord Injury Center, Balgrist University Hospital, University of 
Zurich, Forchstrasse 340, 8008, Zurich, Switzerland. patrick.freund@balgrist.ch.
(6)Zurich Neuroscience Center (ZNZ), Winterthurer Strasse 190, 8057, Zürich, 
Switzerland. patrick.freund@balgrist.ch.
(7)Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, 
Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. jan.klohs@bruker.com.
(8)Zurich Neuroscience Center (ZNZ), Winterthurer Strasse 190, 8057, Zürich, 
Switzerland. jan.klohs@bruker.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by progressive episodic memory 
dysfunction. A prominent hallmark of AD is gradual brain atrophy. Despite 
extensive research on brain pathology, the understanding of spinal cord 
pathology in AD and its association with cognitive decline remains understudied. 
We analyzed serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans from the ADNI data 
repository to assess whether progressive cord atrophy is associated with 
clinical worsening. Cervical cord morphometry was measured in 45 patients and 49 
cognitively normal controls (CN) at two time points over 1.5 years. Regression 
analysis examined associations between cord atrophy rate and cognitive 
worsening. Cognitive and functional activity performance declined in patients 
during follow-up. Compared with controls, patients showed a greater rate of 
decline of the anterior-posterior width of the cross-sectional cord area per 
month (- 0.12%, p = 0.036). Worsening in the mini-mental state examination 
(MMSE), clinical dementia rating (CDR), and functional assessment questionnaire 
(FAQ) was associated with faster rates of cord atrophy (MMSE: r = 0.320, 
p = 0.037; CDR: r = - 0.361, p = 0.017; FAQ: r = - 0.398, p = 0.029). 
Progressive cord atrophy occurs in AD patients; its rate over time being 
associated with cognitive and functional activity decline.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-67389-9
PMCID: PMC11405669
PMID: 39284823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


77. Alzheimers Dement. 2018 May;14(5):623-633. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.11.006. Epub 
2017 Dec 20.

Genome-wide association study of Alzheimer's disease endophenotypes at 
prediagnosis stages.

Chung J(1), Wang X(2), Maruyama T(3), Ma Y(4), Zhang X(4), Mez J(5), Sherva 
R(4), Takeyama H(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Lunetta KL(7), 
Farrer LA(8), Jun GR(9).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 
Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Neurogenetics and Integrated Genomics, Andover Innovative Medicines (AiM) 
Institute, Eisai Inc, Andover, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Life Science & Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo, 
Japan; Computational Bio-Big Data Open Innovation Lab, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Life Science & Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo, 
Japan; Computational Bio-Big Data Open Innovation Lab, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan; Research Organization 
for Nano & Life Innovation, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 
Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department of 
Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, 
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Boston 
University, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine (Biomedical Genetics), Boston University, Boston, MA, 
USA; Neurogenetics and Integrated Genomics, Andover Innovative Medicines (AiM) 
Institute, Eisai Inc, Andover, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
gyungah_jun@eisai.com.

INTRODUCTION: Genetic associations for endophenotypes of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) in cognitive stages preceding AD have not been thoroughly evaluated.
METHODS: We conducted genome-wide association studies for AD-related 
endophenotypes including hippocampal volume, logical memory scores, and 
cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42 and total/phosphorylated tau in cognitively normal 
(CN), mild cognitive impairment, and AD dementia subjects from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative study.
RESULTS: In CN subjects, study-wide significant (P < 8.3 × 10-9) loci were 
identified for total tau near SRRM4 and C14orf79 and for hippocampal volume near 
MTUS1. In mild cognitive impairment subjects, study-wide significant association 
was found with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near ZNF804B for logical 
memory test of delayed recall scores. We found consistent expression patterns of 
C14orf40 and MTUS1 in carriers with risk alleles of expression SNPs and in 
brains of AD patients, compared with in the noncarriers and in brains of 
controls.
DISCUSSION: Our findings for AD-related brain changes before AD provide insight 
about early AD-related biological processes.

Copyright © 2017 the Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.11.006
PMCID: PMC5938137
PMID: 29274321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2021 Dec 31;7(1):e12168. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12168. 
eCollection 2021.

Prescribing cholinesterase inhibitors in mild cognitive impairment-Observations 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Stage E(1)(2), Svaldi D(2), Sokolow S(3)(4)(5), Risacher SL(1)(6), Marosi K(3), 
Rotter JI(7)(8)(9), Saykin AJ(1)(6), Apostolova LG(1)(2)(6)(10); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center Indianapolis IN USA.
(2)Department of Neurology IU School of Medicine Indianapolis IN USA.
(3)UCLA School of Nursing Los Angeles CA USA.
(4)UCLA Brain Research Insitute Los Angeles CA USA.
(5)UCLA Clinical and Translational Science Institute Los Angeles CA USA.
(6)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences IU School of Medicine 
Indianapolis IN USA.
(7)The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences Harbor-UCLA 
Medical Center Torrance CA USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Torrance CA USA.
(9)The Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation Harbor-UCLA Medical Center 
Torrance CA USA.
(10)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics IU School of Medicine 
Indianapolis IN USA.

INTRODUCTION: Analyses of off-label use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 
(AChEIs) in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has produced mixed results. Post hoc 
analyses of observational cohorts, such as the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI), have reported deleterious effects in AChEI-treated subjects 
(AChEI+). Here, we used neuroimaging biomarkers to determine whether AChEI+ 
subjects had a greater rate of neurodegeneration than untreated (AChEI-) 
subjects while accounting for baseline differences.
METHODS: We selected 121 ADNI MCI AChEI+ subjects and 151 AChEI- subjects with a 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan; 82 AChEI+ and 110 AChEI- also had a 
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) scan. A subset (83 AChEI+ and 98 AChEI-) had 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) 
assessment for amyloid positivity. Linear regression models were used to compare 
the effect of treatment on changes in Mini-Mental State Examination and Clinical 
Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes scores. We used standard regression in SPM (for 
baseline) and the SPM toolbox sandwich estimator, SwE (for longitudinal) for 
comparisons of AChEI+ and AChEI- FDG PET and MRI data.
RESULTS: At baseline, the AChEI+ group had significantly reduced cortical gray 
matter density (GMD) and more hypometabolism than AChEI- subjects. The greater 
rate of atrophy and hypometabolic changes over time in AChEI+ compared to AChEI- 
subjects did not survive correction for baseline differences. AChEI+ 
participants were more likely to be amyloid-positive and have lower GMD and FDG 
standardized uptake value ratio than AChEI- at baseline. AChEI+ subjects showed 
greater atrophy over time, which remained significant after controlling for 
amyloid status.
DISCUSSION: Our data suggest that the observed differences in rates of cognitive 
decline, atrophy, and hypometabolism are likely the result of significant 
baseline differences between the groups. Furthermore, the data indicate no 
treatment effect of AChEI (positive of negative), rather that physicians 
prescribe AChEI to subjects who present with more severe clinical impairment. 
This alone may account for the negative effect seen previously in the ADNI 
population of AChEI use among MCI subjects.

© 2021 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12168
PMCID: PMC8719350
PMID: 35005201

Conflict of interest statement: Eddie Stage, Diana Svaldi, Sophie Sokolow, 
Shannon L. Risacher, Krisztina Marosi, and Jerome I. Rotter have nothing to 
disclose. Andrew J. Saykin has received research support from Eli Lilly and PET 
tracer precursor from AVID Radiopharmaceuticals. He also served on an advisory 
board for Bayer Oncology and received support from Springer‐Nature as 
Editor‐in‐Chief of Brain Imaging and Behavior. Liana G. Apostolova has served on 
an advisory board for Eli Lilly and Biogen and on the Speakers Bureau for 
Piramal and Eli Lilly. Dr. Apostolova has received research support from GE 
Healthcare; AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Inc.; and Piramal Imaging. Liana G. 
Apostolova, MD, MS, has served on Advisory Boards for Eli Lilly, Biogen and Two 
Labs. Dr. Apostolova has received research support from GE Healthcare, AVID 
Radiopharmaceuticals, Inc., Life Molecular Imaging and Roche Diagnostics. Dr. 
Apostolova serves on a DSMB for IQVIA.


79. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2021 May 26;17:1659-1666. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S291020. 
eCollection 2021.

CSF TNF-α Levels Were Associated with Longitudinal Change in Brain Glucose 
Metabolism Among Non-Demented Older People.

Fu P(1), Zhu B(1), Huang Y(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Taizhou First People's Hospital, Taizhou, Zhejiang, 
People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Emerging studies have suggested that tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-α) is implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and that 
cerebral glucose hypometabolism is a key feature of AD. However, the association 
of CSF TNF-α levels with changes in cerebral glucose metabolism has not been 
studied among non-demented older people.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: At baseline, there were a total of 214 non-demented older 
people from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study. We 
examined the cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of CSF TNF-α with 
global cognition (as assessed by mini-mental state examination), verbal memory 
(as assessed by Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test-total learning score), and 
cerebral glucose metabolism (as measured by FDF-PET). Linear mixed-effects 
models were used to examine the longitudinal association of CSF TNF- α with 
change in each outcome over time with adjustment of age, educational level, 
gender, and APOE4 status.
RESULTS: In the cross-sectional study, CSF TNF-α was negatively associated with 
MMSE scores, but not verbal memory or FDG-PET. In the longitudinal study, higher 
CSF TNF- α at baseline was associated with a faster decline in cerebral glucose 
metabolism, but not MMSE scores or RAVLT total learning scores.
CONCLUSION: Higher CSF TNF-α levels were associated with a steeper decline in 
cerebral glucose metabolism among non-demented older people.

© 2021 Fu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S291020
PMCID: PMC8165210
PMID: 34079263

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


80. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Nov 2;13(21):3375. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13213375.

Prediction of Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease 
Using Amyloid PET and Brain MR Imaging Data: A 48-Month Follow-Up Analysis of 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Cohort.

Kim DH(1)(2), Oh M(1), Kim JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Daejeon Eulji Medical Center, Eulji 
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 35233, Republic of Korea.

We developed a novel quantification method named "shape feature" by combining 
the features of amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) and brain magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and evaluated its significance in predicting the 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's disease (AD) in 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. From the ADNI 
database, 334 patients with MCI were included. The brain amyloid smoothing score 
(AV45_BASS) and brain atrophy index (MR_BAI) were calculated using the surface 
area and volume of the region of interest in AV45 PET and MRI. During the 
48-month follow-up period, 108 (32.3%) patients converted from MCI to AD. Age, 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-cog), apolipoprotein E (APOE), standardized 
uptake value ratio (SUVR), AV45_BASS, MR_BAI, and shape feature were 
significantly different between converters and non-converters. Univariate 
analysis showed that age, MMSE, ADAS-cog, APOE, SUVR, AV45_BASS, MR_BAI, and 
shape feature were correlated with the conversion to AD. In multivariate 
analyses, high shape feature, SUVR, and ADAS-cog values were associated with an 
increased risk of conversion to AD. In patients with MCI in the ADNI cohort, our 
quantification method was the strongest prognostic factor for predicting their 
conversion to AD.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13213375
PMCID: PMC10650660
PMID: 37958271

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


81. J Integr Neurosci. 2023 Jul 20;22(4):99. doi: 10.31083/j.jin2204099.

The Structural Changes of Frontal Subregions and Their Correlations with 
Cognitive Impairment in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease.

Shi C(1), Deng H(1), Deng X(1), Rao D(1), Yue W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, 637000 Nanchong, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The frontal lobe is affected by Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI). However, we still lack sufficient understanding of 
subregion atrophy in the frontal cortex, and the relationship between subregions 
volume and cognitive decline in AD or MCI remains unclear.
METHODS: This study enrolled 434 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), including 150 cognitively normals (CN), 187 
subjects with MCI, and 97 patients with AD. The gray matter of frontal regions 
and subregions was divided based on the BNA-246 atlas and its volume was 
measured by voxel-based morphometry (VBM). Analysis of covariance was performed 
to compare the differences in frontal regions and subregions volume. Then, 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and the area under the curve (AUC) 
were used to analyze the discriminative ability of subregion volume to 
distinguish the three groups. In addition, we investigated the association of 
subregion volume with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score and Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Behavior section (ADAS-cog) scores with age, 
gender, education, and the estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV) as 
covariates.
RESULTS: In addition to the regions of frontal lobe atrophy found in previous 
studies, atrophy of the precentral gyrus (PrG) and some of its subregions were 
found in MCI. The volume of the right dorsal area 9/46 (MFG_7_1) was the best 
index to differentiate AD from CN, with an AUC value of 0.7. Moreover, we found 
that some subregions are associated with cognition in patients with MCI and AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Frontal lobe atrophy in MCI is more extensive than we assumed. In 
addition, the volume of right MFG_7_1 has the potential to distinguish AD from 
CN.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.jin2204099
PMID: 37519164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


82. Neurol Res Pract. 2023 Aug 3;5(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s42466-023-00262-8.

Clinical characteristics of patients with suspected Alzheimer's disease within a 
CSF Aß-ratio grey zone.

Yosypyshyn D(1), Kučikienė D(1), Ramakers I(1)(2), Schulz JB(1)(3); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Reetz K(4)(5), Costa AS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 
52074, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, School for Mental Health and 
Neuroscience, Alzheimer Center Limburg, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(3)JARA Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, RWTH Aachen & 
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Aachen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 
52074, Aachen, Germany. kreetz@ukaachen.de.
(5)JARA Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, RWTH Aachen & 
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Aachen, Germany. kreetz@ukaachen.de.

BACKGROUND: The AT(N) research framework for Alzheimer's disease (AD) remains 
unclear on how to best deal with borderline cases. Our aim was to characterise 
patients with suspected AD with a borderline Aß1-42/Aß1-40 ratio in 
cerebrospinal fluid.
METHODS: We analysed retrospective data from two cohorts (memory clinic cohort 
and ADNI) of patients (n = 63) with an Aß1-42/Aß1-40 ratio within a 
predefined borderline area-Q1 above the validated cut-off value(grey zone). We 
compared demographic, clinical, neuropsychological and neuroimaging features 
between grey zone patients and patients with low Aß1-42 (normal Aß ratio but 
pathological Aß1-42, n = 42) and patients with AD (pathological Aß, P-Tau, und 
T-Tau, n = 80).
RESULTS: Patients had mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia and a median 
age of 72 years. Demographic and general clinical characteristics did not differ 
between the groups. Patients in the grey zone group were the least impaired in 
cognition. However, they overlapped with the low Aß1-42 group in verbal episodic 
memory performance, especially in delayed recall and recognition. The grey zone 
group had less severe medial temporal atrophy, but mild posterior atrophy and 
mild white matter hyperintensities, similar to the low Aß1-42 group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients in the Aß ratio grey zone were less impaired, but showed 
clinical overlap with patients on the AD continuum. These borderline patients 
may be at an earlier disease stage. Assuming an increased risk of AD and 
progressive cognitive decline, careful consideration of clinical follow-up is 
recommended when using dichotomous approaches to classify Aß status.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s42466-023-00262-8
PMCID: PMC10398972
PMID: 37533121

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


83. Eur Radiol. 2022 Oct;32(10):6965-6976. doi: 10.1007/s00330-022-09081-y. Epub 
2022 Aug 24.

How segmentation methods affect hippocampal radiomic feature accuracy in 
Alzheimer's disease analysis?

Zheng Q(1), Zhang Y(2), Li H(3), Tong X(2), Ouyang M(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, No30, Qingquan 
Road, Laishan District, Yantai, 264005, Shandong, China. zhengqiang@ytu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, No30, Qingquan 
Road, Laishan District, Yantai, 264005, Shandong, China.
(3)Departments of Medical Oncology and Radiology, Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding 
Hospital of Qingdao University Medical College, Yantai, 264000, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, 19104, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Hippocampal radiomic features (HRFs) can serve as biomarkers in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, how different hippocampal segmentation 
methods affect HRFs in AD is still unknown. The aim of the study was to 
investigate how different segmentation methods affect HRF accuracy in AD 
analysis.
METHODS: A total of 1650 subjects were identified from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative database (ADNI). The mini-mental state examination 
(MMSE) and Alzheimer's disease assessment scale (ADAS-cog13) were also adopted. 
After calculating the HRFs of intensity, shape, and textural features from each 
side of the hippocampus in structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI), the 
consistency of HRFs calculated from 7 different hippocampal segmentation methods 
was validated, and the performance of machine learning-based classification of 
AD vs. normal control (NC) adopting the different HRFs was also examined. 
Additional 571 subjects from the European DTI Study on Dementia database (EDSD) 
were to validate the consistency of results.
RESULTS: Between different segmentations, HRFs showed a high measurement 
consistency (R > 0.7), a high significant consistency between NC, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and AD (T-value plot, R > 0.8), and consistent significant 
correlations between HRFs and MMSE/ADAS-cog13 (p < 0.05). The best NC vs. AD 
classification was obtained when the hippocampus was sufficiently segmented by 
primitive majority voting (threshold = 0.2). High consistent results were 
reproduced from independent EDSD cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: HRFs exhibited high consistency across different hippocampal 
segmentation methods, and the best performance in AD classification was obtained 
when HRFs were extracted by the naïve majority voting method with a more 
sufficient segmentation and relatively low hippocampus segmentation accuracy.
KEY POINTS: • The hippocampal radiomic features exhibited high 
measurement/statistical/clinical consistency across different hippocampal 
segmentation methods. • The best performance in AD classification was obtained 
when hippocampal radiomics were extracted by the naïve majority voting method 
with a more sufficient segmentation and relatively low hippocampus segmentation 
accuracy.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Radiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-022-09081-y
PMID: 35999372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Jul 14;13:672077. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.672077. 
eCollection 2021.

Association of Tau Pathology With Clinical Symptoms in the Subfields of 
Hippocampal Formation.

Ge X(1)(2)(3), Zhang D(2), Qiao Y(2), Zhang J(2), Xu J(4), Zheng Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University, 
Jinan, China.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), USC Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics 
Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.
(3)School of Medical Imaging, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, China.
(4)College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin Key Lab of Cognitive Computing 
and Application, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.

Objective: To delineate the relationship between clinical symptoms and tauopathy 
of the hippocampal subfields under different amyloid statuses. Methods: One 
hundred and forty-three subjects were obtained from the ADNI project, including 
87 individuals with normal cognition, 46 with mild cognitive impairment, and 10 
with Alzheimer's disease (AD). All subjects underwent the tau PET, amyloid PET, 
T1W, and high-resolution T2W scans. Clinical symptoms were assessed by the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) total score and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale cognition 13 (ADAS-cog-13) total score, comprising memory and executive 
function scores. The hippocampal subfields including Cornu Ammonis (CA1-3), 
subiculum (Sub), and dentate gyrus (DG), as well as the adjacent 
para-hippocampus (PHC) and entorhinal cortex (ERC), were segmented automatically 
using the Automatic Segmentation of Hippocampal Subfields (ASHS) software. The 
relationship between tauopathy/volume of the hippocampal subfields and 
assessment scores was calculated using partial correlation analysis under 
different amyloid status, by controlling age, gender, education, apolipoprotein 
E (APOE) allele ɛ4 carrier status, and, time interval between the acquisition 
time of tau PET and amyloid PET scans. Results: Compared with amyloid negative 
(A-) group, individuals from amyloid positive (A+) group are more impaired based 
on the Mini-mental State Examination (MMSE; p = 3.82e-05), memory (p = 
6.30e-04), executive function (p = 0.0016), and ADAS-cog-13 scores (p = 
5.11e-04). Significant decrease of volume (CA1, DG, and Sub) and increase of tau 
deposition (CA1, Sub, ERC, and PHC) of the hippocampal subfields of both 
hemispheres were observed for the A+ group compared to the A- group. Tauopathy 
of ERC is significantly associated with memory score for the A- group, and the 
associated regions spread into Sub and PHC for the A+ group. The relationship 
between the impairment of behavior or executive function and tauopathy of the 
hippocampal subfield was discovered within the A+ group. Leftward asymmetry was 
observed with the association between assessment scores and tauopathy of the 
hippocampal subfield, which is more prominent for the NPI score for the A+ 
group. Conclusion: The associations of tauopathy/volume of the hippocampal 
subfields with clinical symptoms provide additional insight into the 
understanding of local changes of the human HF during the AD continuum and can 
be used as a reference for future studies.

Copyright © 2021 Ge, Zhang, Qiao, Zhang, Xu and Zheng.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.672077
PMCID: PMC8317580
PMID: 34335226

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


85. Am J Alzheimers Dis (Columbia). 2013;1(2):81-92. doi: 10.7726/ajad.2013.1006.

Cortical thickness and semantic fluency in Alzheimer's disease and mild 
cognitive impairment.

Eastman JA(1), Hwang KS(1), Lazaris A(2), Chow N(1), Ramirez L(1), Babakchanian 
S(1), Woo E(3), Thompson PM(1), Apostolova LG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA ; Imaging Genetics 
Center, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is declarative memory loss, but 
deficits in semantic fluency are also observed. We assessed how semantic fluency 
relates to cortical atrophy to identify specific regions that play a role in the 
loss of access to semantic information. Whole-brain structural magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) data were analyzed from 9 Normal Control (NC)(M=76.7, 
SD=5.6), 40 Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) (M=74.4, SD=8.6), and 10 probable AD 
(M=72.4, SD=8.0) subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). They all were administered the Category Fluency (CF) animals and 
vegetables tests. Poorer semantic fluency was associated with bilateral cortical 
atrophy of the inferior parietal lobule (Brodman areas (BA) 39 and 40) and BA 6, 
8, and 9 in the frontal lobe, as well as BA 22 in the temporal lobe. More 
diffuse frontal associations were seen in the left hemisphere involving BA 9, 
10, 32, 44, 45, and 46. Additional cortical atrophy was seen in the 
temporoparietal (BA 37) and the right parastriate (BA 19, 18) cortices. 
Associations were more diffuse for performance on vegetable fluency than animal 
fluency. The permutation-corrected map-wise significance for CF animals was 
pcorrected=0.01 for the left hemisphere, and pcorrected=0.06 for the right 
hemisphere. The permutation-corrected map-wise significance for CF vegetables 
was pcorrected=0.009 for the left hemisphere, and pcorrected=0.03 for the right 
hemisphere. These results demonstrate the profound effect of cortical atrophy on 
semantic fluency. Specifically, tapping into semantic knowledge involves the 
frontal lobe in addition to the language cortices of the temporoparietal region.

DOI: 10.7726/ajad.2013.1006
PMCID: PMC4207059
PMID: 25346870


86. BMC Geriatr. 2015 Sep 7;15:107. doi: 10.1186/s12877-015-0103-3.

Relationship between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and Mini-mental State 
Examination for assessment of mild cognitive impairment in older adults.

Trzepacz PT(1), Hochstetler H(2), Wang S(3), Walker B(4), Saykin AJ(5); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, San, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Consulting RF, Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason 
SS, Albers CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, 
Clark D, Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, 
Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, 
Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec 
DM, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, 
Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, 
Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, 
Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail M, Brand 
C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, 
Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall T, 
Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, Finger E, 
Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, 
Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, 
Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall 
G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, 
Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, 
Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, 
Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, 
Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen 
D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka 
M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, 
Neuropsychiatry O, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, 
Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, 
Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, 
Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, 
Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, 
Schultz SK, Ponto LL, Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, 
Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, 
Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga 
AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen 
R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Gessert D, Sather T, Davis M, Morrison R, 
Jiminez G, Neylan T, Hayes J, Finley S, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, 
Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, 
Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, 
Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, 
Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho 
K, Weiner MW, Friedl K, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, Shah RC, 
Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy P, Petrella JR, James O, Porsteinsson AP, 
Goldstein B, Martin KS, Mulnard RA, Thai G, McAdams-Ortiz C, Mintzer J, 
Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, 
Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Allard J, Johnson 
SC, Fruehling J, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, 
Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chaing G, Ravdin L.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
pttrzepacz@outlook.com.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company or one of its subsidiaries, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. hochstetler_helen_m@lilly.com.
(3)Eli Lilly and Company or one of its subsidiaries, Lilly Corporate Center, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. wang_shufang@lilly.com.
(4)University College of London, Gower Street, London, UK. 
brett.walker.14@ucl.ac.uk.
(5)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
asaykin@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) was developed to enable 
earlier detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) relative to familiar 
multi-domain tests like the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE). Clinicians need to 
better understand the relationship between MoCA and MMSE scores.
METHODS: For this cross-sectional study, we analyzed 219 healthy control (HC), 
299 MCI, and 100 Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia cases from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI)-GO/2 database to evaluate MMSE and MoCA 
score distributions and select MoCA values to capture early and late MCI cases. 
Stepwise variable selection in logistic regression evaluated relative value of 
four test domains for separating MCI from HC. Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ) was evaluated as a strategy to separate dementia from MCI. 
Equi-percentile equating produced a translation grid for MoCA against MMSE 
scores. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analyses evaluated lower cutoff 
scores for capturing the most MCI cases.
RESULTS: Most dementia cases scored abnormally, while MCI and HC score 
distributions overlapped on each test. Most MCI cases scored ≥ 17 on MoCA 
(96.3%) and ≥ 24 on MMSE (98.3%). The ceiling effect (28-30 points) for MCI and 
HC was less using MoCA (18.1%) versus MMSE (71.4%). MoCA and MMSE scores 
correlated most for dementia (r = 0.86; versus MCI r = 0.60; HC r = 0.43). 
Equi-percentile equating showed a MoCA score of 18 was equivalent to MMSE of 24. 
ROC analysis found MoCA ≥ 17 as the cutoff between MCI and dementia that 
emphasized high sensitivity (92.3%) to capture MCI cases. The core and 
orientation domains in both tests best distinguished HC from MCI groups, whereas 
comprehension/executive function and attention/calculation were not helpful. 
Mean FAQ scores were significantly higher and a greater proportion had abnormal 
FAQ scores in dementia than MCI and HC.
CONCLUSIONS: MoCA and MMSE were more similar for dementia cases, but MoCA 
distributes MCI cases across a broader score range with less ceiling effect. A 
cutoff of ≥ 17 on the MoCA may help capture early and late MCI cases; depending 
on the level of sensitivity desired, ≥ 18 or 19 could be used. Functional 
assessment can help exclude dementia cases. MoCA scores are translatable to the 
MMSE to facilitate comparison.

DOI: 10.1186/s12877-015-0103-3
PMCID: PMC4562190
PMID: 26346644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Transl Psychiatry. 2021 Nov 10;11(1):577. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01675-2.

Mild behavioral impairment correlates of cognitive impairments in older adults 
without dementia: mediation by amyloid pathology.

Sun Y(1), Xu W(1), Chen KL(2), Shen XN(2), Tan L(3), Yu JT(4); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain 
Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China. dr.tanlan@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, State 
Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain 
Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
jintai_yu@fudan.edu.cn.

The relationship between mild behavioral impairment (MBI) and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) is intricate and still not well investigated. The purpose of the 
study is to examine the roles of the AD imaging pathologies in modulating the 
associations of MBI with cognitive impairments. We analyzed 1129 participants 
(563 [49.86%] female), who had measures of Neuropsychiatric Inventory 
Questionnaire (NPI-Q), cognition, and amyloid PET AD biomarkers from the 
Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We assess the longitudinal 
neuropathological and clinical correlates of baseline MBI via linear mixed 
effects and Cox proportional hazard models. The mediation analyses were used to 
test the mediation effects of AD pathologies on cognition. We found that MBI was 
associated with worse global cognition as represented by Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) (p < 0.001), and higher β-amyloid burden (p < 0.001). 
β-amyloid partially mediated the effects of MBI on cognition with the mediation 
percentage varied from 14.67 to 40.86% for general cognition, memory, executive, 
and language functions for non-dementia individuals. However, no significant 
associations were discovered between MBI and tau burden or neurodegeneration. 
Furthermore, longitudinal analyses revealed that individuals with MBI had a 
faster increase in brain amyloid burden (p < 0.001) and a higher risk of 
clinical conversion (HR = 2.42, 95% CI = 1.45 to 4.01 p < 0.001). In conclusion, 
MBI could be an imperative prediction indicator of clinical and pathological 
progression. In addition, amyloid pathologies might partially mediate the 
influences of MBI on cognitive impairments and AD risk.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-021-01675-2
PMCID: PMC8580970
PMID: 34759274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


88. Int Psychogeriatr. 2015 Mar;27(3):429-37. doi: 10.1017/S1041610214002129. Epub 
2014 Sep 26.

Is there an MCI reversion to cognitively normal? Analysis of Alzheimer's disease 
biomarkers profiles.

Park MH(1), Han C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology,Korea University Medical College and Korea University 
Ansan Hospital,South Korea.
(2)Department of Psychiatry,Korea University Medical College and Korea 
University Ansan Hospital,South Korea.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the characteristics of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
biomarkers for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) reversion to cognitively normal 
(CN).
METHODS: Of a total of 1,233 participants from the ADNI database, 42 
participants with MCI reversion to CN (MCIr), 778 with MCI, and 413 CN were 
obtained. We evaluated demographics, clinical outcomes, medication use, MCI 
type, and AD biomarkers, including genetic, cerebrospinal fluid, imaging, and 
neuropsychological data.
RESULTS: This study showed that the differences between MCIr and CN were only 
age, Mini-Mental State Examination, and Clinical Dementia Rating - Sum of Boxes, 
but the differences between MCIr and MCI were not only clinical outcomes but 
also AD biomarkers, including genetic, cerebrospinal fluid, imaging, and 
neuropsychological data. Overall, MCIr may be similar to CN and not MCI in 
clinical characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: With assessment of MCI reversion to CN, the possibility of 
false-positive errors should be considered. With the assistance of AD 
biomarkers, MCI can be evaluated more accurately than the conventional criteria.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610214002129
PMID: 25255915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2020 Apr;187:105290. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105290. Epub 2019 Dec 24.

Region-of-Interest based sparse feature learning method for Alzheimer's disease 
identification.

Wang L(1), Liu Y(2), Zeng X(3), Cheng H(1), Wang Z(4), Wang Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Robotics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, 611731 China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100049 China. Electronic address: yanliu@ucas.ac.cn.
(3)Department of Radiology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191 
China. Electronic address: xiangzhuzeng@126.com.
(4)Department of Radiology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191 
China.
(5)Beijing Union University, Beijing, 100101 China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: In recent years, some clinical parameters, such as the 
volume of gray matter (GM) and cortical thickness, have been used as anatomical 
features to identify Alzheimer's disease (AD) from Healthy Controls (HC) in some 
feature-based machine learning methods. However, fewer image-based feature 
parameters have been proposed, which are equivalent to these clinical 
parameters, to describe the atrophy of regions-of-interest (ROIs) of the brain. 
In this study, we aim to extract effective image-based feature parameters to 
improve the diagnostic performance of AD with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
data.
METHODS: A new subspace-based sparse feature learning method is proposed, which 
builds a union-of-subspace representation model to realize feature extraction 
and disease identification. Specifically, the proposed method estimates feature 
dimensions reasonably, at the same time, it protects local features for the 
specified ROIs of the brain, and realizes image-based feature extraction and 
classification automatically instead of computing the volume of GM or cortical 
thickness preliminarily.
RESULTS: Experimental results illustrate the effectiveness and robustness of the 
proposed method on feature extraction and classification, which are based on the 
sampled clinical dataset from Peking University Third Hospital of China and the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset. The extracted 
image-based feature parameters describe the atrophy of ROIs of the brain well as 
clinical parameters but show better performance in AD identification than 
clinical parameters. Based on them, the important ROIs for AD identification can 
be identified even for correlated variables.
CONCLUSION: The extracted features and the proposed identification parameters 
show high correlation with the volume of GM and the clinical mini-mental state 
examination (MMSE) score respectively. The proposed method will be useful in 
denoting the changes of cerebral pathology and cognitive function in AD 
patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.105290
PMID: 31927305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jan 25;13:774804. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.774804. 
eCollection 2021.

Development of a Sex-Specific Risk Scoring System for the Prediction of 
Cognitively Normal People to Patients With Mild Cognitive Impairment 
(SRSS-CNMCI).

Luo W(1)(2), Wen H(3), Ge S(2)(4), Tang C(2)(4), Liu X(1), Lu L(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Information Engineering, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Evidence-Based Medicine and Data Science Centre, Guangzhou University of 
Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)South China Research Center for Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Medical College 
of Acu-Moxi and Rehabilitation, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop a sex-specific risk scoring system, abbreviated 
as SRSS-CNMCI, for the prediction of the conversion of cognitively normal (CN) 
people into patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) to provide a reliable 
tool for the prevention of MCI.
METHODS: CN at baseline participants 61-90 years of age were selected from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database with at least one 
follow-up. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models were used to identify 
the major risk factors associated with the conversion from CN to MCI and to 
develop the SRSS-CNMCI. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis 
was used to determine risk cutoff points corresponding to an optimal prediction. 
The results were externally validated, including evaluation of the 
discrimination and calibration in the Harvard Aging Brain Study (HABS) database.
RESULTS: A total of 471 participants, including 240 female (51%) and 231 male 
participants (49%) aged from 61 to 90 years, were included in the study cohort. 
The final multivariable models and the SRSS-CNMCI included age, APOE e4, mini 
mental state examination (MMSE) and clinical dementia rating (CDR). The 
C-statistics of the SRSS-CNMCI were 0.902 in the female subgroup and 0.911 in 
the male subgroup. The cutoff point of high and low risks was 33% in the female 
subgroup, indicating that more than 33% female participants were considered to 
have a high risk, and more than 9% participants were considered to have a high 
risk in the male subgroup. The SRSS-CNMCI performed well in the external cohort: 
the C-statistics were 0.950 in the female subgroup and 0.965 in the male 
subgroup.
CONCLUSION: The SRSS-CNMCI performs well in various cohorts and provides an 
accurate prediction and a generalization.

Copyright © 2022 Luo, Wen, Ge, Tang, Liu and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.774804
PMCID: PMC8823413
PMID: 35145390

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


91. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2017 Sep 12;9(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s13195-017-0300-8.

Moderating effects of sex on the impact of diagnosis and amyloid positivity on 
verbal memory and hippocampal volume.

Caldwell JZK(1), Berg JL(2), Cummings JL(2), Banks SJ(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 West Bonneville 
Avenue, Las Vegas, NV, 89106, USA. caldwej5@ccf.org.
(2)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, 888 West Bonneville 
Avenue, Las Vegas, NV, 89106, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) impacts men and women differently, but the 
effect of sex on predementia stages is unclear. The objective of this study was 
to examine whether sex moderates the impact of florbetapir positron emission 
tomography (PET) amyloid positivity (A+) on verbal learning and memory 
performance and hippocampal volume (HV) in normal cognition (NC) and early mild 
cognitive impairment (eMCI).
METHODS: Seven hundred forty-two participants with NC and participants with eMCI 
from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (second cohort [ADNI2] and 
Grand Opportunity Cohort [ADNI-GO]) were included. All had baseline florbetapir 
PET measured, and 526 had screening visit HV measured. Regression moderation 
models were used to examine whether A+ effects on Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test learning and delayed recall and right and left HV (adjusted for total 
intracranial volume) were moderated by diagnosis and sex. Age, cognition at 
screening, education, and apolipoprotein E ε4 carrier status were controlled.
RESULTS: Women with A+, but not those with florbetapir PET amyloid negative 
(A-),eMCI showed poorer learning. For women with NC, there was no relationship 
of A+ with learning. In contrast, A+ men trended toward poorer learning 
regardless of diagnosis. A similar trend was found for verbal delayed recall: 
Women with A+, but not A-, eMCI trended toward reduced delayed recall; no 
effects were observed for women with NC or for men. Hippocampal analyses 
indicated that women with A+, but not those with A-, eMCI, trended toward 
smaller right HV; no significant A+ effects were observed for women with NC. Men 
showed similar, though nonsignificant, patterns of smaller right HV in A+ eMCI, 
but not in men with A- eMCI or NC. No interactive effects of sex were noted for 
left HV.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with NC showed verbal learning and memory scores robust to 
A+, and women with A+ eMCI lost this advantage. In contrast, A+ impacted men's 
scores less significantly or not at all, and comparably across those with NC and 
eMCI. Sex marginally moderated the relationship of A+ and diagnosis with right 
HV, such that women with NC showed no A+ effect and women with A+ eMCI lost that 
advantage in neural integrity; the pattern in men was less clear. These findings 
show that women with A+ eMCI (i.e., prodromal AD) have differential neural and 
cognitive decline, which has implications for considering sex in early detection 
of AD and development of therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-017-0300-8
PMCID: PMC5596932
PMID: 28899422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
data included in this article were collected for research use as part of the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) project. ADNI is a 
longitudinal, multisite AD biomarker study (www.adni-info.org) that offers 
de-identified data meeting criteria for limited datasets to qualified 
researchers with scientific or educational institution affiliations, upon 
review. Ethics approval for data collection in ADNI was obtained by each ADNI 
participating institution’s institutional review board. All participants gave 
written informed consent at participating institutions. The authors of this 
paper were granted approved access to the ADNI data, and the ADNI Data Sharing 
and Publications Committee (DPC) approved this paper for submission to 
Alzheimer’s Research and Therapy (date of approval, February 24, 2017). CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: JZKC, JLB, and SJB declare 
that they have no competing interests. JLC declares having received in kind 
research support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Teva Pharmaceuticals, and 
CogState; having done consultation for AbbVie, ACADIA Pharmaceuticals, Accera, 
Actinogen Medical, Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Alkahest, Alzheon, Anavex Life 
Sciences, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Avanir Pharmaceuticals, Axovant 
Sciences, Biogen Idec, Biotie Therapies, Boehinger Ingelheim, Chase 
Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, FORUM Pharmaceuticals, Genentech, Grifols, 
Intra-Cellular Therapies, Iris Pharma, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Lundbeck, Merck, Neurotrope BioScience, Novartis, Nutricia, Otsuka, 
Pfizer, Probiodrug, QR Pharma, Resverlogix, Roche, Servier, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals, Suven Life Sciences, Takeda, Taisho Toyama Pharmaceutical Co., 
Transition Therapeutics, United Neuroscience, GE Healthcare, and MedAvante; 
owning stock in Adamas Pharmaceuticals, Prana Biotechnology, Sonexa 
Therapeutics, MedAvante, NeuroTrax, and Neurokos; and owning the copyright of 
the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. In addition, JLC has provided expert 
witness/legal consultation regarding olanzapine and ropinerole. PUBLISHER’S 
NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


92. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;92(3):941-957. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220806.

Can T1-Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging Significantly Improve Mini-Mental 
State Examination-Based Distinguishing Between Mild Cognitive Impairment and 
Early-Stage Alzheimer's Disease?

Marcisz A(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Polanska J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Science and Engineering, The Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Detecting early-stage Alzheimer's disease (AD) is still problematic 
in clinical practice. This work aimed to find T1-weighted MRI-based markers for 
AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to improve the screening process.
OBJECTIVE: Our assumption was to build a screening model that would be 
accessible and easy to use for physicians in their daily clinical routine.
METHODS: The multinomial logistic regression was used to detect status: AD, MCI, 
and normal control (NC) combined with the Bayesian information criterion for 
model selection. Several T1-weighted MRI-based radiomic features were considered 
explanatory variables in the prediction model.
RESULTS: The best radiomic predictor was the relative brain volume. The proposed 
method confirmed its quality by achieving a balanced accuracy of 95.18%, AUC of 
93.25%, NPV of 97.93%, and PPV of 90.48% for classifying AD versus NC for the 
European DTI Study on Dementia (EDSD). The comparison of the two models: with 
the MMSE score only as an independent variable and corrected for the relative 
brain value and age, shows that the addition of the T1-weighted MRI-based 
biomarker improves the quality of MCI detection (AUC: 67.04% versus 71.08%) 
while maintaining quality for AD (AUC: 93.35% versus 93.25%). Additionally, 
among MCI patients predicted as AD inconsistently with the original diagnosis, 
60% from ADNI and 76.47% from EDSD were re-diagnosed as AD within a 48-month 
follow-up. It shows that our model can detect AD patients a few years earlier 
than a standard medical diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: The created method is non-invasive, inexpensive, clinically 
accessible, and efficiently supports AD/MCI screening.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220806
PMCID: PMC10116132
PMID: 36806505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.


93. Neuroradiology. 2016 Jan;58(1):59-67. doi: 10.1007/s00234-015-1596-3. Epub 2015 
Sep 23.

The neural correlates of anomia in the conversion from mild cognitive impairment 
to Alzheimer's disease.

Pravatà E(1)(2), Tavernier J(3), Parker R(4), Vavro H(5), Mintzer JE(6), 
Spampinato MV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA. emanuele.pravata@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neuroradiology, Neurocenter of Southern Switzerland, Ospedale 
Regionale di Lugano, Via Tesserete 46, 6900, Lugano, Switzerland. 
emanuele.pravata@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(5)University Hospital Dubrava, Zagreb, Croatia.
(6)Clinical Biotechnology Research Institute, Roper Hospital, Charleston, SC, 
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Language impairment is frequently observed in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD): in this study, we investigated the extent and 
distribution of brain atrophy in subjects with conversion from mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) to AD with and without naming difficulties.
METHODS: This study was approved by the institutional review board and was HIPAA 
compliant. All subjects or their legal representatives gave informed consent for 
participation. Ninety-one subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) with (N = 51) and without (N = 40) naming impairment as per 
the Boston Naming Test (BNT), underwent brain magnetic resonance (MR) imaging 12 
months before, at AD diagnosis, and 12 months after. Structural MR images were 
processed using voxel-based morphometry. Cross-sectional comparisons and mixed 
ANOVA models for assessing regional gray matter (GM) volume differences were 
performed.
RESULTS: As from 12 months prior to AD diagnosis, patients with naming 
difficulties showed distinct areas of greater GM loss in the left fusiform gyrus 
(Brodmann area 20) than patients without naming difficulties. Differences in the 
GM atrophy extended to the left hemisphere in the subsequent 12 months.
CONCLUSION: This study provided evidence of distinct patterns and dynamics of 
brain atrophy in AD patients with naming difficulties when compared to those 
with intact language, as early as 12 months prior to AD diagnosis and in the 
subsequent 12 months.

DOI: 10.1007/s00234-015-1596-3
PMID: 26400852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Chonnam Med J. 2024 Jan;60(1):51-58. doi: 10.4068/cmj.2024.60.1.51. Epub 2024 
Jan 25.

ATN Classification and Clinical Progression of the Amyloid-Negative Group in 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Participants.

Cho SH(1), Kim S(1), Choi SM(1), Kim BC(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chonnam National University Hospital, Chonnam 
National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea.

Alzheimer's disease has recently been classified using three biological markers 
(amyloid [A], tau [T], and neurodegeneration [N]) to help elucidate its 
progression. We aimed to investigate whether there were differences between 
cognitive function and the clinical dementia symptoms over time relative to the 
ATN classification in the amyloid-negative group. In the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, 310 participants who underwent all the 
tests required for ATN classification were enrolled. The cognitive function 
score differences (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale 13 
[ADAS-Cog 13], Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes [CDR-SOB], and Mini-Mental 
State Examination [MMSE]) between the groups were analyzed using the analysis of 
covariance and score changes over time with a linear mixed-effects model. In the 
cross-sectional analysis, ADAS-Cog 13 scores were higher for A-T-N+ and A-T+N+ 
than for A-T-N- (p<0.001) and A-T+N- (p<0.001). In the longitudinal analysis, 
CDR-SOB scores for A-T+N+ deteriorated faster than A-T-N- (p<0.001), A-T+N- 
(p<0.001) and A-T-N+ (p<0.001). Hippocampal atrophy progressed faster in A-T-N+ 
(p<0.001) and A-T+N+ (p=0.02) than in A-T-N-. Through this study, we discovered 
that even in individuals classified as amyloid negative, neurodegeneration with 
tau deposition exacerbates cognitive decline and worsens clinical symptoms, 
underscoring the need for continuous monitoring and observation.

© Chonnam Medical Journal, 2024.

DOI: 10.4068/cmj.2024.60.1.51
PMCID: PMC10828081
PMID: 38304128

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: None declared.


95. Lancet Neurol. 2019 Nov;18(11):1034-1044. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30283-2. 
Epub 2019 Sep 13.

Biomarker-based prognosis for people with mild cognitive impairment (ABIDE): a 
modelling study.

van Maurik IS(1), Vos SJ(2), Bos I(3), Bouwman FH(4), Teunissen CE(5), Scheltens 
P(4), Barkhof F(6), Frolich L(7), Kornhuber J(8), Wiltfang J(9), Maier W(10), 
Peters O(11), Rüther E(12), Nobili F(13), Frisoni GB(14), Spiru L(15), 
Freund-Levi Y(16), Wallin AK(17), Hampel H(18), Soininen H(19), Tsolaki M(20), 
Verhey F(2), Kłoszewska I(21), Mecocci P(22), Vellas B(23), Lovestone S(24), 
Galluzzi S(25), Herukka SK(19), Santana I(26), Baldeiras I(26), de Mendonça 
A(27), Silva D(28), Chetelat G(29), Egret S(29), Palmqvist S(30), Hansson O(31), 
Visser PJ(3), Berkhof J(32), van der Flier WM(33); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department 
of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address: i.vanmaurik@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, School 
for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Alzheimer Centre Limburg, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
(3)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department 
of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, Maastricht University, School for Mental 
Health and Neuroscience, Alzheimer Centre Limburg, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(4)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Institutes of 
Neurology and Healthcare Engineering, University College London, London, UK.
(7)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, Zentralinstitut für Seelische Gesundheit, 
Medical Faculty Mannheim University of Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University of 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center, 
Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Göttingen, Germany; iBiMED, Medical Sciences Department, University of 
Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(10)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases and Gerotopsychiatry, University of 
Bonn, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate 
member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin 
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(13)Clinical Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, 
Italy; Neurology Department, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, 
Italy.
(14)Memory Clinic, University Hospital and University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(15)Geriatrics, Gerontology and Old Age Psychiatry Clinical Department, Carol 
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy-"Elias" Emergency Clinical Hospital, 
Bucharest, Romania; Memory Clinic and Longevity Medicine, Ana Aslan 
International Foundation, Romania.
(16)School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden; Department of 
Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Division of Clinical Geriatrics, 
Karolinska Institutet Center for Alzheimer Research, Stockholm, Sweden; 
Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College 
London, London, UK.
(17)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(18)Alzheimer Precision Medicine, GRC 21, Sorbonne University, AP-HP, 
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France; Eisai, Neurology Business Group, 
Woodcliff Lake, NJ, USA.
(19)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland and 
Neurocenter, Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(20)1st Department of Neurology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Memory 
and Dementia Center, "AHEPA" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(21)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry and Psychotic Disorders, Medical 
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(22)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University 
of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(23)UMR INSERM 1027, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(24)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(25)Lab Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology, IRCCS San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(26)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Neurology, Centro Hospitalar e 
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(27)Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(28)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; Centre for 
Biomedical Research, Universidade do Algarve, Faro, Portugal.
(29)Université Normandie, Inserm, Université de Caen-Normandie, Inserm UMR-S 
U1237, GIP Cyceron, Caen, France.
(30)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden; Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, 
Lund, Sweden.
(31)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden; Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, 
Sweden.
(32)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(33)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department 
of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2019 Nov;18(11):985-987. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30353-9.

BACKGROUND: Biomarker-based risk predictions of dementia in people with mild 
cognitive impairment are highly relevant for care planning and to select 
patients for treatment when disease-modifying drugs become available. We aimed 
to establish robust prediction models of disease progression in people at risk 
of dementia.
METHODS: In this modelling study, we included people with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) from single-centre and multicentre cohorts in Europe and North 
America: the European Medical Information Framework for Alzheimer's Disease 
(EMIF-AD; n=883), Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; n=829), 
Amsterdam Dementia Cohort (ADC; n=666), and the Swedish BioFINDER study (n=233). 
Inclusion criteria were a baseline diagnosis of MCI, at least 6 months of 
follow-up, and availability of a baseline Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
and MRI or CSF biomarker assessment. The primary endpoint was clinical 
progression to any type of dementia. We evaluated performance of previously 
developed risk prediction models-a demographics model, a hippocampal volume 
model, and a CSF biomarkers model-by evaluating them across cohorts, 
incorporating different biomarker measurement methods, and determining 
prognostic performance with Harrell's C statistic. We then updated the models by 
re-estimating parameters with and without centre-specific effects and evaluated 
model calibration by comparing observed and expected survival. Finally, we 
constructed a model combining markers for amyloid deposition, tauopathy, and 
neurodegeneration (ATN), in accordance with the National Institute on Aging and 
Alzheimer's Association research framework.
FINDINGS: We included all 2611 individuals with MCI in the four cohorts, 1007 
(39%) of whom progressed to dementia. The validated demographics model 
(Harrell's C 0·62, 95% CI 0·59-0·65), validated hippocampal volume model (0·67, 
0·62-0·72), and updated CSF biomarkers model (0·72, 0·68-0·74) had adequate 
prognostic performance across cohorts and were well calibrated. The newly 
constructed ATN model had the highest performance (0·74, 0·71-0·76).
INTERPRETATION: We generated risk models that are robust across cohorts, which 
adds to their potential clinical applicability. The models could aid clinicians 
in the interpretation of CSF biomarker and hippocampal volume results in 
individuals with MCI, and help research and clinical settings to prepare for a 
future of precision medicine in Alzheimer's disease. Future research should 
focus on the clinical utility of the models, particularly if their use affects 
participants' understanding, emotional wellbeing, and behaviour.
FUNDING: ZonMW-Memorabel.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(19)30283-2
PMID: 31526625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neurosci Lett. 2020 Jan 1;714:134563. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134563. Epub 
2019 Oct 31.

Associations of cigarette smoking with memory decline and neurodegeneration 
among cognitively normal older individuals.

Wu P(1), Li W(1), Cai X(1), Yan H(2), Chen M(3); for Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ruian People's Hospital, The Third 
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Ruian 325200, PR China. 
Electronic address: 502414011@qq.com.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China. Electronic 
address: cnzjdrc@163.com.

Cigarette smoking is associated with a higher risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
but the underlying mechanisms remain to be clarified. In this study, we aimed to 
examine the effects of cigarette smoking on multiple AD biomarkers among older 
individuals with normal cognition (NC). Among 415 older individuals with NC from 
the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, we examined the 
associations between smoking status (non-smokers vs smokers) and global 
cognition, verbal memory, hippocampal volumes, cerebral glucose metabolism and 
CSF AD pathologies. The primary findings of this study were: (1) In NC, smokers 
showed worse performance on verbal memory tests [Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test (RAVLT) total learning score and delayed recall] than non-smokers; (2) 
Compared with non-smokers, smokers had significantly lower HpVR; (3) Smokers, 
relative to non-smokers, demonstrated lower levels of cerebral glucose 
metabolism as measured by FDG-PET; and (4) there were no significant differences 
in CSF AD pathologies (CSF Aβ42, t-tau or p-tau) between non-smokers and 
smokers. Longitudinal studies are needed to investigate the relationship between 
cigarettes smoking and changes in AD-related markers over time. Further, ADNI 
participants were highly educated and predominantly white. This may limit the 
generalizability of our results. In summary, among individuals with NC, 
cigarette smoking was associated with memory impairment, hippocampal atrophy and 
cerebral glucose hypometabolism, but not CSF AD pathologies.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2019.134563
PMID: 31678372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Neuroinflammation. 2020 Mar 14;17(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s12974-020-01750-3.

A peripheral neutrophil-related inflammatory factor predicts a decline in 
executive function in mild Alzheimer's disease.

Bawa KK(1)(2), Krance SH(3), Herrmann N(2)(4), Cogo-Moreira H(5)(6), Ouk 
M(1)(2), Yu D(2), Wu CY(1)(2), Black SE(2)(7), Lanctôt KL(1)(2)(4), Swardfager 
W(8)(9); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, 1 King's 
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)Hurvitz Brain Sciences Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, 2075 Bayview 
Avenue, Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5, Canada.
(3)Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, 1151 Richmond 
St, London, ON, N6A 5C1, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 250 
College Street, 8th floor, Toronto, ON, M5T 1R8, Canada.
(5)Departamento Psichiatria, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 1, R. Borges 
Lagoa, 570-Vila Clementino, Sao Paulo, SP, 04038-000, Brazil.
(6)Department of Education and Psychology: Division of Methods and Evaluation, 
Freie Universität Berlin, Fabeckstraße 37 & 69; Habelschwerdter Allee 45, 14195, 
Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 6 
Queen's Park Crescent West, Third Floor, Toronto, ON, M5S 3H2, Canada.
(8)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, 1 King's 
College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada. w.swardfager@utoronto.ca.
(9)Hurvitz Brain Sciences Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, 2075 Bayview 
Avenue, Toronto, ON, M4N 3M5, Canada. w.swardfager@utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: Studies suggest a role of the innate immune system, including the 
activity of neutrophils, in neurodegeneration related to Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), but prospective cognitive data remain lacking in humans. We aimed to 
investigate the predictive relationship between neutrophil-associated 
inflammatory proteins in peripheral blood and changes in memory and executive 
function over 1 year in patients with AD.
METHODS: Participants with AD were identified from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin 
(NGAL), myeloperoxidase (MPO), interleukin-8 (IL-8), macrophage inflammatory 
protein-1 beta (MIP-1β), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) were assayed by luminex 
immunofluorescence multiplex assay at baseline. Confirmatory factor analysis was 
used to test an underlying neutrophil associated plasma inflammatory factor. 
Composite z-scores for memory and executive function were generated from 
multiple tests at baseline and at 1 year. A multiple linear regression model was 
used to investigate the association of the baseline inflammatory factor with 
changes in memory and executive function over 1 year.
RESULTS: Among AD patients (n = 109, age = 74.8 ± 8.1, 42% women, Mini Mental 
State Examination [MMSE] = 23.6 ± 1.9), the neutrophil-related inflammatory 
proteins NGAL (λ = 0.595, p < .001), MPO (λ = 0.575, p < .001), IL-8 (λ = 0.525, 
p < .001), MIP-1β (λ = 0.411, p = .008), and TNF (λ = 0.475, p < .001) were 
found to inform an underlying factor. Over 1 year, this inflammatory factor 
predicted a decline in executive function (β = - 0.152, p = 0.015) but not 
memory (β = 0.030, p = 0.577) in models controlling for demographics, brain 
atrophy, white matter hyperintensities, the ApoE ε4 allele, concomitant 
medications, and baseline cognitive performance.
CONCLUSIONS: An inflammatory factor constructed from five neutrophil-related 
markers in peripheral blood predicted a decline in executive function over 
1 year in people with mild AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-020-01750-3
PMCID: PMC7071641
PMID: 32171317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


98. Neurology. 2020 Sep 15;95(11):e1538-e1553. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010256. 
Epub 2020 Jul 16.

Multitracer model for staging cortical amyloid deposition using PET imaging.

Collij LE(1), Heeman F(1), Salvadó G(1), Ingala S(1), Altomare D(1), de Wilde 
A(1), Konijnenberg E(1), van Buchem M(1), Yaqub M(1), Markiewicz P(1), Golla 
SSV(1), Wottschel V(1), Wink AM(1), Visser PJ(1), Teunissen CE(1), Lammertsma 
AA(1), Scheltens P(1), van der Flier WM(1), Boellaard R(1), van Berckel BNM(1), 
Molinuevo JL(1), Gispert JD(1), Schmidt ME(1), Barkhof F(1), Lopes Alves I(2); 
ALFA Study, for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; AMYPAD 
Consortium.

Collaborators: Arenaza-Urquijo EM, Beteta A, Brugulat-Serrat A, Cacciaglia R, 
Boccagni AC, Bodien YG, Crous-Bou M, Deulofeu C, Dominguez R, Fauria K, Falcon 
C, Félez-Sánchez M, González de Echavarri JM, Grau-Rivera O, Hernández L, Huesa 
G, Huguet J, LeÓn M, Marne P, Menchón T, Milà-Alomà M, Operto G, Minguillon C, 
Pascual M, Polo A, Pradas S, Sala-Vila A, Sánchez-Benavides G, Shekari M, 
Soteras A, Suárez-Calvet M, Tenas L, Vilanova M, Vilor-Tejedor N, Barkhof F, 
Farrar G, Diaz C, Pla S, Gispert JD, Buckley C, Frisoni GB, Stephens A, 
Molinuevo JL, Ford L, Schmidt M, Lopes Alves I, Georges J, Mett A, Richard E, 
Scheltens P, Visser PJ, van Berckel BN, Berkhof H, Meije Wink A, Yaqub M, 
Leeuwis A, van Maurik I, Collij L, Heeman F, Iidow I, Garibotto V, Altomare D, 
Moro C, Ritchie C, Muniz Terrera G, Wimberley C, Thompson G, Waldman A, Payoux 
P, Vellas B, Delrieu J, Saint-Aubert L, Hitzel A, Julian A, Rivera OG, Salvadó 
Blasco G, Shekari M, Knezevic I, Perissinotti A, Nordberg A, Kivipelto M, 
Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Savitcheva I, Drzezga A, Jessen F, Dietlein M, Kobe C, 
Schmidt M, Walker Z, Markiewicz P, Jiao J, Win Z, Gismondi R, Banton N, Bullich 
S, Manyakov N, Kaliukhovich D, Wolz R, Woodside J, Gray K, Birck C, Milne R, 
Smedinga M.

Author information:
(1)From Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine (L.E.C., F.H., S.I., M.Y., 
S.S.V.G., V.W., A.M.W., A.A.L., R.B., B.N.M.v.B., F.B., I.L.A.), Neurochemistry 
Laboratory (C.E.T.), Alzheimer Center (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., P.S., 
W.M.v.d.F.), and Department of Neurology (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., 
P.S., W.M.v.d.F.), Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands; 
Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation (G.S., 
J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (J.D.G.); Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (J.L.M.), Madrid; IMIM 
(Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute) (G.S., J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona, Spain; Laboratory of 
Neuroimaging of Aging (D.A.), University of Geneva; Memory Clinic (D.A.), 
University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland; Centre for Medical Image Computing 
(P.M., F.B.), Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK; and Janssen Pharmaceutica NV (M.E.S.), Beerse, Belgium.
(2)From Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine (L.E.C., F.H., S.I., M.Y., 
S.S.V.G., V.W., A.M.W., A.A.L., R.B., B.N.M.v.B., F.B., I.L.A.), Neurochemistry 
Laboratory (C.E.T.), Alzheimer Center (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., P.S., 
W.M.v.d.F.), and Department of Neurology (D.A., A.d.W., E.K., M.v.B., P.J.V., 
P.S., W.M.v.d.F.), Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands; 
Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation (G.S., 
J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (J.D.G.); Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (J.L.M.), Madrid; IMIM 
(Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute) (G.S., J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona; 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (J.L.M., J.D.G.), Barcelona, Spain; Laboratory of 
Neuroimaging of Aging (D.A.), University of Geneva; Memory Clinic (D.A.), 
University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland; Centre for Medical Image Computing 
(P.M., F.B.), Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK; and Janssen Pharmaceutica NV (M.E.S.), Beerse, Belgium. 
i.lopesalves@amsterdamumc.nl.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and evaluate a model for staging cortical amyloid 
deposition using PET with high generalizability.
METHODS: Three thousand twenty-seven individuals (1,763 cognitively unimpaired 
[CU], 658 impaired, 467 with Alzheimer disease [AD] dementia, 111 with non-AD 
dementia, and 28 with missing diagnosis) from 6 cohorts (European Medical 
Information Framework for AD, Alzheimer's and Family, Alzheimer's Biomarkers in 
Daily Practice, Amsterdam Dementia Cohort, Open Access Series of Imaging Studies 
[OASIS]-3, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative [ADNI]) who underwent 
amyloid PET were retrospectively included; 1,049 individuals had follow-up 
scans. With application of dataset-specific cutoffs to global standard uptake 
value ratio (SUVr) values from 27 regions, single-tracer and pooled multitracer 
regional rankings were constructed from the frequency of abnormality across 400 
CU individuals (100 per tracer). The pooled multitracer ranking was used to 
create a staging model consisting of 4 clusters of regions because it displayed 
a high and consistent correlation with each single-tracer ranking. Relationships 
between amyloid stage, clinical variables, and longitudinal cognitive decline 
were investigated.
RESULTS: SUVr abnormality was most frequently observed in cingulate, followed by 
orbitofrontal, precuneal, and insular cortices and then the associative, 
temporal, and occipital regions. Abnormal amyloid levels based on binary global 
SUVr classification were observed in 1.0%, 5.5%, 17.9%, 90.0%, and 100.0% of 
individuals in stage 0 to 4, respectively. Baseline stage predicted decline in 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score (ADNI: n = 867, F = 67.37, p < 0.001; 
OASIS: n = 475, F = 9.12, p < 0.001) and faster progression toward an MMSE score 
≤25 (ADNI: n = 787, hazard ratio [HR]stage1 2.00, HRstage2 3.53, HRstage3 4.55, 
HRstage4 9.91, p < 0.001; OASIS: n = 469, HRstage4 4.80, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The pooled multitracer staging model successfully classified the 
level of amyloid burden in >3,000 individuals across cohorts and radiotracers 
and detects preglobal amyloid burden and distinct risk profiles of cognitive 
decline within globally amyloid-positive individuals.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000010256
PMCID: PMC7713745
PMID: 32675080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;80(1):321-330. doi: 10.3233/JAD-201117.

Associations of Vascular Risk with Cognition, Brain Glucose Metabolism, and 
Clinical Progression in Cognitively Intact Elders.

Yu GX(1)(2), Zhang T(3), Hou XH(4), Ou YN(4), Hu H(4), Wang ZT(4), Guo Y(4), Xu 
W(4), Tan L(4), Yu JT(3), Tan L(3)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence supports an important role of vascular risk in 
cognitive decline and dementia.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine whether vascular risk was associated with 
cognitive decline, cerebral hypometabolism, and clinical progression in 
cognitively intact elders.
METHODS: Vascular risk was assessed by the Framingham Heart Study general 
Cardiovascular disease (FHS-CVD) risk score. The cross-sectional and 
longitudinal associations of FHS-CVD risk score with cognition and brain glucose 
metabolism were explored using multivariate linear regression and linear mixed 
effects models, respectively. The risk of clinical progression conversion was 
assessed using Kaplan-Meier survival curves and multivariate Cox proportional 
hazard models.
RESULTS: A total of 491 cognitively intact elders were included from Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Participants with high FHS-CVD 
risk scores had lower baseline Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (p = 0.009), 
executive function (EF) (p < 0.001), memory function (MEM) (p < 0.001) scores, 
and F18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) uptake 
(p < 0.001) than those with low FHS-CVD risk scores. In longitudinal analyses, 
individuals with higher FHS-CVD risk scores had greater longitudinal declines in 
MMSE (p = 0.043), EF (p = 0.029) scores, and FDG-PET uptake (p = 0.035). 
Besides, individuals with a higher vascular risk had an increased risk of 
clinical progression (p = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicated effects of vascular risk on cognitive 
decline, cerebral hypometabolism, and clinical progression. Early detection and 
management of vascular risk factors might be useful in the prevention of 
dementia.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-201117
PMID: 33523005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;61(1):333-345. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170580.

Biological Factors Contributing to the Response to Cognitive Training in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Peter J(1)(2), Schumacher LV(3), Landerer V(2), Abdulkadir A(1)(4), Kaller 
CP(5)(6), Lahr J(2), Klöppel S(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of Old Age Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of 
Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Medical Psychology and Medical Sociology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Germany.
(6)BrainLinks-BrainTools Cluster of Excellence, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Centre for Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Freiburg, Germany.

In mild cognitive impairment (MCI), small benefits from cognitive training were 
observed for memory functions but there appears to be great variability in the 
response to treatment. Our study aimed to improve the characterization and 
selection of those participants who will benefit from cognitive intervention. We 
evaluated the predictive value of disease-specific biological factors for the 
outcome after cognitive training in MCI (n = 25) and also considered motivation 
of the participants. We compared the results of the cognitive intervention group 
with two independent control groups of MCI patients (local memory clinic, 
n = 20; ADNI cohort, n = 302). The primary outcome measure was episodic memory 
as measured by verbal delayed recall of a 10-word list. Episodic memory remained 
stable after treatment and slightly increased 6 months after the intervention. 
In contrast, in MCI patients who did not receive an intervention, episodic 
memory significantly decreased during the same time interval. A larger left 
entorhinal cortex predicted more improvement in episodic memory after treatment 
and so did higher levels of motivation. Adding disease-specific biological 
factors significantly improved the prediction of training-related change 
compared to a model based simply on age and baseline performance. Bootstrapping 
with resampling (n = 1000) verified the stability of our finding. Cognitive 
training might be particularly helpful in individuals with a bigger left 
entorhinal cortex as individuals who did not benefit from intervention showed 
17% less volume in this area. When extended to alternative treatment options, 
stratification based on disease-specific biological factors is a useful step 
towards individualized medicine.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170580
PMCID: PMC5734129
PMID: 29154279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neurology. 2017 May 2;88(18):1751-1758. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003907. Epub 
2017 Apr 5.

Randomized controlled trials in mild cognitive impairment: Sources of 
variability.

Petersen RC(1), Thomas RG(2), Aisen PS(2), Mohs RC(2), Carrillo MC(2), Albert 
MS(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and Foundation for NIH 
(FNIH) Biomarkers Consortium AD MCI Placebo Data Analysis Project Team.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (R.C.P.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN; Department of Neurosciences (R.G.T.), University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla; University of Southern California (P.S.A.), Los Angeles; 
Eli Lilly and Company (R.C.M.), Indianapolis, IN; Division of Medical & 
Scientific Relations (M.C.C.), Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL; and Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine (M.S.A.), Baltimore, MD. R.C.M. is currently with 
Global Alzheimer's Platform Foundation, Washington, DC. peter8@mayo.edu.
(2)From the Department of Neurology (R.C.P.), Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN; Department of Neurosciences (R.G.T.), University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla; University of Southern California (P.S.A.), Los Angeles; 
Eli Lilly and Company (R.C.M.), Indianapolis, IN; Division of Medical & 
Scientific Relations (M.C.C.), Alzheimer's Association, Chicago, IL; and Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine (M.S.A.), Baltimore, MD. R.C.M. is currently with 
Global Alzheimer's Platform Foundation, Washington, DC.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2017 May 2;88(18):1757. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003893.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the variability in performance among placebo groups in 
randomized controlled trials for mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Placebo group data were obtained from 2 National Institute on Aging 
(NIA) MCI randomized controlled trials, the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative 
Study (ADCS) MCI trial and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI), which is a simulated clinical trial, in addition to industry-sponsored 
clinical trials involving rivastigmine, galantamine, rofecoxib, and donepezil. 
The data were collated for common measurement instruments. The performance of 
the placebo participants from these studies was tracked on the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale, Mini-Mental State Examination, and 
Clinical Dementia Rating-sum of boxes, and for progression on these measures to 
prespecified clinical study endpoints. APOE status, where available, was also 
analyzed for its effects.
RESULTS: The progression to clinical endpoints varied a great deal among the 
trials. The expected performances were seen for the participants in the 2 NIA 
trials, ADCS and ADNI, with generally worsening of performance over time; 
however, the industry-sponsored trials largely showed stable or improved 
performance in their placebo participants. APOE4 carrier status influenced 
results in an expected fashion on the study outcomes, including rates of 
progression and cognitive subscales.
CONCLUSIONS: In spite of apparently similar criteria for MCI being adopted by 
the 7 studies, the implementation of the criteria varied a great deal. Several 
explanations including instruments used to characterize participants and 
variability among study populations contributed to the findings.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003907
PMCID: PMC5409843
PMID: 28381516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2016 Jun;31(4):313-31. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acw014. Epub 
2016 Apr 15.

False-Positive Error Rates for Reliable Digit Span and Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test Performance Validity Measures in Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment and 
Early Alzheimer Disease.

Loring DW(1), Goldstein FC(2), Chen C(3), Drane DL(4), Lah JJ(2), Zhao L(5), 
Larrabee GJ(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA dloring@emory.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)Independent Practice, Sarasota, FL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective is to examine failure on three embedded performance 
validity tests [Reliable Digit Span (RDS), Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) 
logistic regression, and AVLT recognition memory] in early Alzheimer disease 
(AD; n = 178), amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI; n = 365), and 
cognitively intact age-matched controls (n = 206).
METHOD: Neuropsychological tests scores were obtained from subjects 
participating in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
RESULTS: RDS failure using a ≤7 RDS threshold was 60/178 (34%) for early AD, 
52/365 (14%) for MCI, and 17/206 (8%) for controls. A ≤6 RDS criterion reduced 
this rate to 24/178 (13%) for early AD, 15/365 (4%) for MCI, and 7/206 (3%) for 
controls. AVLT logistic regression probability of ≥.76 yielded unacceptably high 
false-positive rates in both clinical groups [early AD = 149/178 (79%); MCI = 
159/365 (44%)] but not cognitively intact controls (13/206, 6%). AVLT 
recognition criterion of ≤9/15 classified 125/178 (70%) of early AD, 155/365 
(42%) of MCI, and 18/206 (9%) of control scores as invalid, which decreased to 
66/178 (37%) for early AD, 46/365 (13%) for MCI, and 10/206 (5%) for controls 
when applying a ≤5/15 criterion. Despite high false-positive rates across 
individual measures and thresholds, combining RDS ≤ 6 and AVLT recognition ≤9/15 
classified only 9/178 (5%) of early AD and 4/365 (1%) of MCI patients as invalid 
performers.
CONCLUSIONS: Embedded validity cutoffs derived from mixed clinical groups 
produce unacceptably high false-positive rates in MCI and early AD. Combining 
embedded PVT indicators lowers the false-positive rate.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acw014
PMCID: PMC4876935
PMID: 27084732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2012;34(7):758-72. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2012.681628. 
Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Parallel but not equivalent: challenges and solutions for repeated assessment of 
cognition over time.

Gross AL(1), Inouye SK, Rebok GW, Brandt J, Crane PK, Parisi JM, Tommet D, 
Bandeen-Roche K, Carlson MC, Jones RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. aldengross@hsl.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: Analyses of individual differences in change may be unintentionally 
biased when versions of a neuropsychological test used at different follow-ups 
are not of equivalent difficulty. This study's objective was to compare mean, 
linear, and equipercentile equating methods and demonstrate their utility in 
longitudinal research.
STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING: The Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and 
Vital Elderly (ACTIVE, N = 1,401) study is a longitudinal randomized trial of 
cognitive training. The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI, 
n = 819) is an observational cohort study. Nonequivalent alternate versions of 
the Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) were administered in both studies.
RESULTS: Using visual displays, raw and mean-equated AVLT scores in both studies 
showed obvious nonlinear trajectories in reference groups that should show 
minimal change and poor equivalence over time (ps ≤ .001), and raw scores 
demonstrated poor fits in models of within-person change (root mean square 
errors of approximation, RMSEAs > 0.12). Linear and equipercentile equating 
produced more similar means in reference groups (ps ≥ .09) and performed better 
in growth models (RMSEAs < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Equipercentile equating is the preferred equating method because it 
accommodates tests more difficult than a reference test at different percentiles 
of performance and performs well in models of within-person trajectory. The 
method has broad applications in both clinical and research settings to enhance 
the ability to use nonequivalent test forms.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2012.681628
PMCID: PMC3574868
PMID: 22540849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021 Jun 25;13(1):118. doi: 10.1186/s13195-021-00856-x.

Pathological correlates of impaired self-awareness of memory function in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Gagliardi G(1)(2)(3), Kuppe M(4), Lois C(4)(5), Hanseeuw B(4)(5), Vannini 
P(6)(4)(5); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. ggagliardi@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. ggagliardi@bwh.harvard.edu.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. ggagliardi@bwh.harvard.edu.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Impaired self-awareness of memory function, a.k.a. anosognosia, is 
a common symptom in Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, its pathological 
correlates remain unclear. Here, we investigated the impact of amyloid and tau 
on memory self-awareness.
METHODS: Two hundred thirty-six clinically normal (N) and 102 impaired (I) 
participants from the ADNI cohort were included. Amyloid (global) and tau burden 
(in entorhinal and inferior temporal cortices) were assessed using positron 
emission tomography (PET). Self-awareness of memory was assessed using 
discrepancy indexes of subjective participant-informant ratings, as well as 
participant-objective scores of memory performance. Subjective and objective 
values were derived from the Everyday Cognition memory questionnaire and Logical 
Memory (delayed recall).
RESULTS: Lower awareness (both methods) of memory function was associated with 
higher levels of pathology in the I group as compared to N. There was a 
significant effect of tauopathy, but not amyloidosis, on individual complaint, 
such that higher levels of tau associated with lower awareness.
DISCUSSION: Impaired self-awareness appears progressively in the evolution of 
the disease related to AD biomarkers. Discordant subjective and objective 
measures may be important for clinical consideration.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-021-00856-x
PMCID: PMC8234669
PMID: 34172086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


105. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;46(4):901-12. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142943.

Neuropsychological Testing Predicts Cerebrospinal Fluid Amyloid-β in Mild 
Cognitive Impairment.

Kandel BM(1), Avants BB(2), Gee JC(2), Arnold SE(3), Wolk DA(4); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative1.

Author information:
(1)Penn Image Computing and Science Laboratory and Department of Bioengineering, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Penn Image Computing and Science Laboratory and Department of Radiology, 
Perelman School of Medicine of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Psychometric tests predict conversion of mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) to probable Alzheimer's disease (AD). Because the definition of clinical 
AD relies on those same psychometric tests, the ability of these tests to 
identify underlying AD pathology remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the degree to which psychometric testing predicts 
molecular evidence of AD amyloid pathology, as indicated by cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) amyloid-β (Aβ)1 - 42, in patients with MCI, as compared to neuroimaging 
biomarkers.
METHODS: We identified 408 MCI subjects with CSF Aβ levels, psychometric test 
data, FDG-PET scans, and acceptable volumetric MR scans from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). We used psychometric tests and imaging 
biomarkers in univariate and multivariate models to predict Aβ status.
RESULTS: The 30-min delayed recall score of the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test was the best predictor of Aβ status among the psychometric tests, achieving 
an AUC of 0.67 ± 0.02 and odds ratio of 2.5 ± 0.4. FDG-PET was the best 
imaging-based biomarker (AUC 0.67 ± 0.03, OR 3.2 ± 1.2), followed by hippocampal 
volume (AUC 0.64 ± 0.02, OR 2.4 ± 0.3). A multivariate analysis based on the 
psychometric tests improved on the univariate predictors, achieving an AUC of 
0.68 ± 0.03 (OR 3.38 ± 1.2). Adding imaging biomarkers to the multivariate 
analysis did not improve the AUC.
CONCLUSION: Psychometric tests perform as well as imaging biomarkers to predict 
presence of molecular markers of AD pathology in MCI patients and should be 
considered in the determination of the likelihood that MCI is due to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-142943
PMCID: PMC4699841
PMID: 25881908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Dec 15;13:764272. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.764272. 
eCollection 2021.

Deep Learning With 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET Gives Valid Diagnoses for the 
Uncertain Cases in Memory Impairment of Alzheimer's Disease.

Zhang W(1)(2), Zhang T(1), Pan T(3), Zhao S(1)(2), Nie B(1), Liu H(1), Shan 
B(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Beijing Engineering Research Center of Radiographic Techniques and Equipment, 
Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Physics and Microelectronics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 
China.

Objectives: Neuropsychological tests are an important basis for the memory 
impairment diagnosis in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, multiple memory tests 
might be conflicting within-subjects and lead to uncertain diagnoses in some 
cases. This study proposed a framework to diagnose the uncertain cases of memory 
impairment. Methods: We collected 2,386 samples including AD, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), and cognitive normal (CN) using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) and three different neuropsychological 
tests (Mini-Mental State Examination, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive Subscale, and Clinical Dementia Rating) from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). A deep learning (DL) framework using 
FDG-PET was proposed to diagnose uncertain memory impairment cases that were 
conflicting between tests. Subsequent ANOVA, chi-squared, and t-test were used 
to explain the potential causes of uncertain cases. Results: For certain cases 
in the testing set, the proposed DL framework outperformed other methods with 
95.65% accuracy. For the uncertain cases, its positive diagnoses had a 
significant (p < 0.001) worse decline in memory function than negative diagnoses 
in a longitudinal study of 40 months on average. In the memory-impaired group, 
uncertain cases were mainly explained by an AD metabolism pattern but mild in 
extent (p < 0.05). In the healthy group, uncertain cases were mainly explained 
by a non-energetic mental state (p < 0.001) measured using a global 
deterioration scale (GDS), with a significant depression-related metabolism 
pattern detected (p < 0.05). Conclusion: A DL framework for diagnosing uncertain 
cases of memory impairment is proposed. Proved by longitudinal tracing of its 
diagnoses, it showed clinical validity and had application potential. Its valid 
diagnoses also provided evidence and explanation of uncertain cases based on the 
neurodegeneration and depression mental state.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Zhang, Pan, Zhao, Nie, Liu, Shan and Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.764272
PMCID: PMC8715958
PMID: 34975455

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


107. Neuroimage. 2013 Sep;78:233-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.073. Epub 2013 
Apr 12.

Modeling disease progression via multi-task learning.

Zhou J(1), Liu J, Narayan VA, Ye J; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Evolutionary Medicine and Informatics, The Biodesign Institute, 
ASU, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common type of dementia, is a severe 
neurodegenerative disorder. Identifying biomarkers that can track the progress 
of the disease has recently received increasing attentions in AD research. An 
accurate prediction of disease progression would facilitate optimal 
decision-making for clinicians and patients. A definitive diagnosis of AD 
requires autopsy confirmation, thus many clinical/cognitive measures including 
Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale 
cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) have been designed to evaluate the cognitive 
status of the patients and used as important criteria for clinical diagnosis of 
probable AD. In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting disease 
progression measured by the cognitive scores and selecting biomarkers predictive 
of the progression. Specifically, we formulate the prediction problem as a 
multi-task regression problem by considering the prediction at each time point 
as a task and propose two novel multi-task learning formulations. We have 
performed extensive experiments using data from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Specifically, we use the baseline MRI features 
to predict MMSE/ADAS-Cog scores in the next 4 years. Results demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the proposed multi-task learning formulations for disease 
progression in comparison with single-task learning algorithms including ridge 
regression and Lasso. We also perform longitudinal stability selection to 
identify and analyze the temporal patterns of biomarkers in disease progression. 
We observe that cortical thickness average of left middle temporal, cortical 
thickness average of left and right Entorhinal, and white matter volume of left 
Hippocampus play significant roles in predicting ADAS-Cog at all time points. We 
also observe that several MRI biomarkers provide significant information for 
predicting MMSE scores for the first 2 years, however very few are shown to be 
significant in predicting MMSE score at later stages. The lack of predictable 
MRI biomarkers in later stages may contribute to the lower prediction 
performance of MMSE than that of ADAS-Cog in our study and other related 
studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.073
PMID: 23583359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2023 Jul;12(7):1029-1042. doi: 
10.1002/psp4.12974. Epub 2023 May 2.

Modeling Alzheimer's disease progression utilizing clinical trial and ADNI data 
to predict longitudinal trajectory of CDR-SB.

Jamalian S(1), Dolton M(2), Chanu P(3), Ramakrishnan V(1), Franco Y(1), 
Wildsmith K(1), Manser P(1), Teng E(1), Jin JY(1), Quartino A(1), Hsu JC(1); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Roche Products Australia Pty Ltd., Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Genentech/Roche, Lyon, France.

There is strong interest in developing predictive models to better understand 
individual heterogeneity and disease progression in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We 
have built upon previous longitudinal AD progression models, using a nonlinear, 
mixed-effect modeling approach to predict Clinical Dementia Rating Scale - Sum 
of Boxes (CDR-SB) progression. Data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (observational study) and placebo arms from four interventional 
trials (N = 1093) were used for model building. The placebo arms from two 
additional interventional trials (N = 805) were used for external model 
validation. In this modeling framework, CDR-SB progression over the disease 
trajectory timescale was obtained for each participant by estimating disease 
onset time (DOT). Disease progression following DOT was described by both global 
progression rate (RATE) and individual progression rate (α). Baseline 
Mini-Mental State Examination and CDR-SB scores described the interindividual 
variabilities in DOT and α well. This model successfully predicted outcomes in 
the external validation datasets, supporting its suitability for prospective 
prediction and use in design of future trials. By predicting individual 
participants' disease progression trajectories using baseline characteristics 
and comparing these against the observed responses to new agents, the model can 
help assess treatment effects and support decision making for future trials.

© 2023 Genentech, Inc. CPT: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology 
and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/psp4.12974
PMCID: PMC10349194
PMID: 37101394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.J., V.R., E.T., J.Y.J., and J.C.H. are all 
full‐time employees of Genentech, Inc. and may own company stock/stock options. 
M.D. is an employee of Roche Products Pty Ltd. and owns stock/stock options in 
F. Hoffmann‐La Roche Ltd. P.C. is an employee of Roche/Genentech and owns Roche 
stock options. Y.F. is a former employee of Genentech, Inc. K.W. is a former 
full‐time employee of Genentech, Inc. and may own company stock/stock options. 
P.M. is a former employee of Genentech, Inc. A.Q. was an employee of Genentech, 
Inc. at the time of this study (current affiliation: Clinical Pharmacology and 
Quantitative Pharmacology, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden).


109. Front Neurol. 2021 Feb 5;11:576029. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.576029. eCollection 
2020.

Machine Learning for Diagnosis of AD and Prediction of MCI Progression From 
Brain MRI Using Brain Anatomical Analysis Using Diffeomorphic Deformation.

Syaifullah AH(1)(2), Shiino A(1), Kitahara H(3), Ito R(3), Ishida M(4), Tanigaki 
K(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Shiga, Japan.
(2)Center for the Epidemiological Research in Asia (CERA), Shiga University of 
Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.
(3)Department of Radiology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Shimane University, Shimane, Japan.
(5)Research Institute, Shiga Medical Center, Shiga, Japan.

Background: With the growing momentum for the adoption of machine learning (ML) 
in medical field, it is likely that reliance on ML for imaging will become 
routine over the next few years. We have developed a software named BAAD, which 
uses ML algorithms for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and prediction 
of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) progression. Methods: We constructed an 
algorithm by combining a support vector machine (SVM) to classify and a 
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to reduce concerned variables. We grouped 
progressive MCI and AD as an AD spectrum and trained SVM according to this 
classification. We randomly selected half from the total 1,314 subjects of AD 
neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) from North America for SVM training, and the 
remaining half were used for validation to fine-tune the model hyperparameters. 
We created two types of SVMs, one based solely on the brain structure (SVMst), 
and the other based on both the brain structure and Mini-Mental State 
Examination score (SVMcog). We compared the model performance with two expert 
neuroradiologists, and further evaluated it in test datasets involving 519, 592, 
69, and 128 subjects from the Australian Imaging, Biomarker & Lifestyle Flagship 
Study of Aging (AIBL), Japanese ADNI, the Minimal Interval Resonance Imaging in 
AD (MIDIAD) and the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS), respectively. 
Results: BAAD's SVMs outperformed radiologists for AD diagnosis in a structural 
magnetic resonance imaging review. The accuracy of the two radiologists was 57.5 
and 70.0%, respectively, whereas, that of the SVMst was 90.5%. The diagnostic 
accuracy of the SVMst and SVMcog in the test datasets ranged from 88.0 to 97.1% 
and 92.5 to 100%, respectively. The prediction accuracy for MCI progression was 
83.0% in SVMst and 85.0% in SVMcog. In the AD spectrum classified by SVMst, 
87.1% of the subjects were Aβ positive according to an AV-45 positron emission 
tomography. Similarly, among MCI patients classified for the AD spectrum, 89.5% 
of the subjects progressed to AD. Conclusion: Our ML has shown high performance 
in AD diagnosis and prediction of MCI progression. It outperformed expert 
radiologists, and is expected to provide support in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2021 Syaifullah, Shiino, Kitahara, Ito, Ishida and Tanigaki.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.576029
PMCID: PMC7893082
PMID: 33613411

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


110. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Sep 10:2024.09.05.611489. doi: 
10.1101/2024.09.05.611489.

Harmonization of Structural Brain Connectivity through Distribution Matching.

Zhou Z(1), Fischl B(1), Aganj I(1).

Author information:
(1)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Radiology Department, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

The increasing prevalence of multi-site diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging (dMRI) studies potentially offers enhanced statistical power for 
investigating brain structure. However, these studies face challenges due to 
variations in scanner hardware and acquisition protocols. While several methods 
exist for dMRI data harmonization, few specifically address structural brain 
connectivity. We introduce a new distribution-matching approach to harmonizing 
structural brain connectivity across different sites and scanners. We evaluate 
our method using structural brain connectivity data from two distinct datasets 
of OASIS-3 and ADNI-2, comparing its performance to the widely used ComBat 
method. Our approach is meant to align the statistical properties of 
connectivity data from these two datasets. We examine the impact of 
harmonization on the correlation of brain connectivity with the Mini-Mental 
State Examination score and age. Our results demonstrate that our 
distribution-matching technique more effectively harmonizes structural brain 
connectivity, often producing stronger and more significant correlations 
compared to ComBat. Qualitative assessments illustrate the desired 
distributional alignment of ADNI-2 with OASIS-3, while quantitative evaluations 
confirm robust performance. This work contributes to the growing field of dMRI 
harmonization, potentially improving the reliability and comparability of 
structural connectivity studies that combine data from different sources in 
neuroscientific and clinical research.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.09.05.611489
PMCID: PMC11418962
PMID: 39314357

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interests B. Fischl is 
an advisor to DeepHealth, a company whose medical pursuits focus on medical 
imaging and measurement technologies. His interests were reviewed and are 
managed by Massachusetts General Hospital and Mass General Brigham in accordance 
with their conflict-of-interest policies. The other authors have nothing to 
disclose.


111. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;84(1):141-149. doi: 10.3233/JAD-210685.

Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer's Disease Is Not Associated with APOE.

Katzourou I(1), Leonenko G(1), Ivanov D(1), Meggy A(2), Marshall R(2), Sims 
R(2), Williams J(1), Holmans P(2), Escott-Price V(1); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)UK Dementia Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(2)Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK.

BACKGROUND: The rate of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been 
found to vary widely between individuals, with numerous factors driving this 
heterogeneity.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compute a measure of cognitive decline in 
patients with AD based on clinical information and to utilize this measure to 
explore the genetic architecture of cognitive decline in AD.
METHODS: An in-house cohort of 616 individuals, hereby termed the Cardiff 
Genetic Resource for AD, as well as a subset of 577 individuals from the 
publicly available ADNI dataset, that have been assessed at multiple timepoints, 
were used in this study. Measures of cognitive decline were computed using 
various mixed effect linear models of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). 
After an optimal model was selected, a metric of cognitive decline for each 
individual was estimated as the random slope derived from this model. This 
metric was subsequently used for testing the association of cognitive decline 
with apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype.
RESULTS: No association was found between the number of APOEɛ2 or ɛ4 alleles and 
the rate of cognitive decline in either of the datasets examined.
CONCLUSION: Further exploration is required to uncover possible genetic variants 
that affect the rate of decline in patients with AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-210685
PMID: 34487047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;78(2):573-585. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200680.

The Impact of Amyloid-β or Tau on Cognitive Change in the Presence of Severe 
Cerebrovascular Disease.

Jang H(1)(2)(3), Kim HJ(1)(2)(3), Choe YS(1)(3), Kim SJ(1)(3), Park S(1), Kim 
Y(4), Kim KW(5), Lyoo CH(6), Cho H(6), Ryu YH(7), Choi JY(7), DeCarli C(8), Na 
DL(1)(2)(3), Seo SW(1)(2)(3)(9)(10); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Neuroscience Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Samsung Alzheimer Research Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Department of Neurology, Kangwon National University Hospital, Chuncheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Neurology, Jeonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Neurology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Neurology and Center for Neuroscience, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(10)Department of Intelligent Precision Healthcare Convergence, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: As Alzheimer's disease (AD) and cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) 
commonly coexist, the interaction between two has been of the considerable 
interest.
OBJECTIVE: We determined whether the association of Aβ and tau with cognitive 
decline differs by the presence of significant CSVD.
METHODS: We included 60 subcortical vascular cognitive impairment (SVCI) from 
Samsung Medical Center and 82 Alzheimer's disease-related cognitive impairment 
(ADCI) from ADNI, who underwent Aβ (florbetaben or florbetapir) and tau 
(flortaucipir, FTP) PET imaging. They were retrospectively assessed for 5.0±3.9 
and 5.6±1.9 years with Clinical Dementia Rating-sum of boxes 
(CDR-SB)/Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Mixed effects models were used to 
investigate the interaction between Aβ/tau and group on CDR-SB/MMSE changes.
RESULTS: The frequency of Aβ positivity (45% versus 54.9%, p = 0.556) and mean 
global FTP SUVR (1.17±0.21 versus 1.16±0.17, p = 0.702) were not different 
between the two groups. We found a significant interaction effect of Aβ 
positivity and SVCI group on CDR-SB increase/MMSE decrease 
(p = 0.013/p < 0.001), and a significant interaction effect of global FTP uptake 
and SVCI group on CDR-SB increase/MMSE decrease (p < 0.001 and p = 0.030). 
Finally, the interaction effects of regional tau and group were prominent in the 
Braak III/IV (p = 0.001) and V/VI (p = 0.003) not in Braak I/II region 
(p = 0.398).
CONCLUSION: The association between Aβ/tau and cognitive decline is stronger in 
SVCI than in ADCI. Therefore, our findings suggested that Aβ positivity or tau 
burden (particularly in the Braak III/IV or V/VI regions) and CSVD might 
synergistically affect cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200680
PMID: 33016911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;24:101954. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101954. Epub 2019 Jul 
23.

Multi-study validation of data-driven disease progression models to characterize 
evolution of biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease.

Archetti D(1), Ingala S(2), Venkatraghavan V(3), Wottschel V(4), Young AL(5), 
Bellio M(6), Bron EE(7), Klein S(8), Barkhof F(9), Alexander DC(10), Oxtoby 
NP(11), Frisoni GB(12), Redolfi A(13); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative; for EuroPOND Consortium.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. 
Electronic address: darchetti@fatebenefratelli.eu.
(2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: s.ingala@vumc.nl.
(3)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Depts. of Medical Informatics & 
Radiology, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
v.venkatraghavan@erasmusmc.nl.
(4)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: v.wottschel@vumc.nl.
(5)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: alexandra.young.11@ucl.ac.uk.
(6)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: maura.bellio.16@ucl.ac.uk.
(7)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Depts. of Medical Informatics & 
Radiology, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands. Electronic address: e.bron@erasmusmc.nl.
(8)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Depts. of Medical Informatics & 
Radiology, Erasmus MC, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
s.klein@erasmusmc.nl.
(9)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Institutes of Neurology and Healthcare Engineering, 
UCL, London, UK. Electronic address: f.barkhof@vumc.nl.
(10)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: d.alexander@ucl.ac.uk.
(11)Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science, UCL, 
London, UK. Electronic address: n.oxtoby@ucl.ac.uk.
(12)University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; IRCCS Istituto Centro San 
Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: 
giovanni.frisoni@unige.ch.
(13)IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. 
Electronic address: aredolfi@fatebenefratelli.eu.

Understanding the sequence of biological and clinical events along the course of 
Alzheimer's disease provides insights into dementia pathophysiology and can help 
participant selection in clinical trials. Our objective is to train two 
data-driven computational models for sequencing these events, the Event Based 
Model (EBM) and discriminative-EBM (DEBM), on the basis of well-characterized 
research data, then validate the trained models on subjects from clinical 
cohorts characterized by less-structured data-acquisition protocols. Seven 
independent data cohorts were considered totalling 2389 cognitively normal (CN), 
1424 mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 743 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. 
The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) data set was used as 
training set for the constriction of disease models while a collection of 
multi-centric data cohorts was used as test set for validation. Cross-sectional 
information related to clinical, cognitive, imaging and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) biomarkers was used. Event sequences obtained with EBM and DEBM showed 
differences in the ordering of single biomarkers but according to both the first 
biomarkers to become abnormal were those related to CSF, followed by cognitive 
scores, while structural imaging showed significant volumetric decreases at 
later stages of the disease progression. Staging of test set subjects based on 
sequences obtained with both models showed good linear correlation with the Mini 
Mental State Examination score (R2EBM = 0.866; R2DEBM = 0.906). In discriminant 
analyses, significant differences (p-value ≤ 0.05) between the staging of 
subjects from training and test sets were observed in both models. No 
significant difference between the staging of subjects from the training and 
test was observed (p-value > 0.05) when considering a subset composed by 562 
subjects for which all biomarker families (cognitive, imaging and CSF) are 
available. Event sequence obtained with DEBM recapitulates the heuristic models 
in a data-driven fashion and is clinically plausible. We demonstrated 
inter-cohort transferability of two disease progression models and their 
robustness in detecting AD phases. This is an important step towards the 
adoption of data-driven statistical models into clinical domain.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101954
PMCID: PMC6675943
PMID: 31362149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2022 Jul 11;14(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s13195-022-01035-2.

The impact of subthreshold levels of amyloid deposition on conversion to 
dementia in patients with amyloid-negative amnestic mild cognitive impairment.

Kim HJ(1)(2), Oh JS(3), Lim JS(1), Lee S(1), Jo S(1), Chung EN(4), Shim 
WH(4)(5), Oh M(3), Kim JS(3), Roh JH(6), Lee JH(7); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan 
Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Uijeongbu Eulji Medical Center, Eulji University 
School of Medicine, Uijeongbu, South Korea.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan 
Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Health Innovation Bigdata Center, Asan Institute for Lifesciences, Department 
of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Neuroscience Institute, Korea University College of Medicine and School of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan 
Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea. jhlee@amc.seoul.kr.

BACKGROUND: About 40-50% of patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) are found to have no significant Alzheimer's pathology based on amyloid 
PET positivity. Notably, conversion to dementia in this population is known to 
occur much less often than in amyloid-positive MCI. However, the relationship 
between MCI and brain amyloid deposition remains largely unknown. Therefore, we 
investigated the influence of subthreshold levels of amyloid deposition on 
conversion to dementia in amnestic MCI patients with negative amyloid PET scans.
METHODS: This study was a retrospective cohort study of patients with 
amyloid-negative amnestic MCI who visited the memory clinic of Asan Medical 
Center. All participants underwent detailed neuropsychological testing, brain 
magnetic resonance imaging, and [18F]-florbetaben (FBB) positron emission 
tomography scan (PET). Conversion to dementia was determined by a neurologist 
based on a clinical interview with a detailed neuropsychological test or a 
decline in the Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination score of more 
than 4 points per year combined with impaired activities of daily living. 
Regional cortical amyloid levels were calculated, and a receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curve for conversion to dementia was obtained. To increase 
the reliability of the results of the study, we analyzed the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset together.
RESULTS: During the follow-up period, 36% (39/107) of patients converted to 
dementia from amnestic MCI. The dementia converter group displayed increased 
standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) values of FBB on PET in the bilateral 
temporal, parietal, posterior cingulate, occipital, and left precuneus cortices 
as well as increased global SUVR. Among volume of interests, the left parietal 
SUVR predicted conversion to dementia with the highest accuracy in the ROC 
analysis (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.762, P < 0.001). The combination of 
precuneus, parietal cortex, and FBB composite SUVRs also showed a higher 
accuracy in predicting conversion to dementia than other models (AUC = 0.763). 
Of the results of ADNI data, the SUVR of the left precuneus SUVR showed the 
highest AUC (AUC = 0.596, P = 0.006).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that subthreshold amyloid levels may contribute 
to conversion to dementia in patients with amyloid-negative amnestic MCI.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-022-01035-2
PMCID: PMC9277922
PMID: 35821150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


115. Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Dec 19;116(6):1492-1506. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac236.

Associations of erythrocyte omega-3 fatty acids with cognition, brain imaging 
and biomarkers in the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative: 
cross-sectional and longitudinal retrospective analyses.

Rouch L(1), Virecoulon Giudici K(1), Cantet C(1), Guyonnet S(1)(2), Delrieu 
J(1)(2)(3), Legrand P(4), Catheline D(4), Andrieu S(2)(5), Weiner 
M(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), de Souto Barreto P(1)(2), Vellas B(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Gerontopole of Toulouse, Institute of Ageing, Toulouse University Hospital, 
Toulouse, Franc.
(2)CERPOP Centre d'Epidémiologie et de Recherche en Santé des Populations, 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 1295, University of 
Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(3)Toulouse NeuroImaging Center, Université de Toulouse, Institut National de la 
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Human Nutrition, Institut Agro, Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 1241, Rennes, France.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Toulouse University Hospital, 
Toulouse, France.
(6)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 2022 Dec 19;116(6):1474-1475. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac248.

BACKGROUND: The association between omega-3 (ω-3) PUFAs and cognition, brain 
imaging and biomarkers is still not fully established.
OBJECTIVES: The aim was to analyze the cross-sectional and retrospective 
longitudinal associations between erythrocyte ω-3 index and cognition, brain 
imaging, and biomarkers among older adults.
METHODS: A total of 832 Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 3 (ADNI-3) 
participants, with a mean (SD) age of 74.0 (7.9) y, 50.8% female, 55.9% 
cognitively normal, 32.7% with mild cognitive impairment, and 11.4% with 
Alzheimer disease (AD) were included. A low ω-3 index (%EPA + %DHA) was defined 
as the lowest quartile (≤3.70%). Cognitive tests [composite score, AD Assessment 
Scale Cognitive (ADAS-Cog), Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS), Trail Making Test, 
Category Fluency, Mini-Mental State Examination, Montreal Cognitive Assessment] 
and brain variables [hippocampal volume, white matter hyperintensities (WMHs), 
positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau] were considered as 
outcomes in regression models.
RESULTS: Low ω-3 index was not associated with cognition, hippocampal, and WMH 
volume or brain Aβ and tau after adjustment for demographics, ApoEε4, 
cardiovascular disease, BMI, and total intracranial volume in the 
cross-sectional analysis. In the retrospective analysis, low ω-3 index was 
associated with greater Aβ accumulation (adjusted β = 0.02; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.03; 
P = 0.003). The composite cognitive score did not differ between groups; 
however, low ω-3 index was significantly associated with greater WMS-delayed 
recall cognitive decline (adjusted β = -1.18; 95% CI: -2.16, -0.19; P = 0.019), 
but unexpectedly lower total ADAS-Cog cognitive decline. Low ω-3 index was 
cross-sectionally associated with lower WMS performance (adjusted β = -1.81, 
SE = 0.73, P = 0.014) and higher tau accumulation among ApoE ε4 carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: Longitudinally, low ω-3 index was associated with greater Aβ 
accumulation and WMS cognitive decline but unexpectedly with lower total 
ADAS-Cog cognitive decline. Although no associations were cross-sectionally 
found in the whole population, low ω-3 index was associated with lower WMS 
cognition and higher tau accumulation among ApoE ε4 carriers. The Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) is registered at clinicaltrials.gov as 
NCT00106899.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/nqac236
PMCID: PMC9761759
PMID: 36253968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2019 Jul 1;44(4):246-260. doi: 10.1503/jpn.180016.

An artificial neural network model for clinical score prediction in Alzheimer 
disease using structural neuroimaging measures.

Bhagwat N(1), Pipitone J(1), Voineskos AN(1), Chakravarty MM(1); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ont. (Bhagwat, Chakravarty); the Cerebral Imaging Centre, 
Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Que. (Bhagwat, Chakravarty); 
the Kimel Family Translational Imaging-Genetics Research Lab, Research Imaging 
Centre, Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction 
and Mental Health, Toronto, Ont. (Bhagwat, Pipitone, Voineskos); the Department 
of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont. (Voineskos); and the 
Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, Que. (Chakravarty), 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The development of diagnostic and prognostic tools for Alzheimer 
disease is complicated by substantial clinical heterogeneity in prodromal 
stages. Many neuroimaging studies have focused on case–control classification 
and predicting conversion from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer disease, 
but predicting scores from clinical assessments (such as the Alzheimer’s Disease 
Assessment Scale or the Mini Mental State Examination) using MRI data has 
received less attention. Predicting clinical scores can be crucial in providing 
a nuanced prognosis and inferring symptomatic severity.
METHODS: We predicted clinical scores at the individual level using a novel 
anatomically partitioned artificial neural network (APANN) model. The model 
combined input from 2 structural MRI measures relevant to the neurodegenerative 
patterns observed in Alzheimer disease: hippocampal segmentations and cortical 
thickness. We evaluated the performance of the APANN model with 10 rounds of 
10-fold cross-validation in 3 experiments, using cohorts from the Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): ADNI1, ADNI2 and ADNI1 + 2.
RESULTS: Pearson correlation and root mean square error between the actual and 
predicted scores on the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale (ADNI1: r = 0.60; 
ADNI2: r = 0.68; ADNI1 + 2: r = 0.63) and Mini Mental State Examination (ADNI1: 
r = 0.52; ADNI2: r = 0.55; ADNI1 + 2: r = 0.55) showed that APANN can accurately 
infer clinical severity from MRI data.
LIMITATIONS: To rigorously validate the model, we focused primarily on large 
cross-sectional baseline data sets with only proof-of-concept longitudinal 
results.
CONCLUSION: The APANN provides a highly robust and scalable framework for 
predicting clinical severity at the individual level using high-dimensional, 
multimodal neuroimaging data.

© 2019 Joule Inc. or its licensors

DOI: 10.1503/jpn.180016
PMCID: PMC6606432
PMID: 30720260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


117. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Aug 10;14:935055. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.935055. 
eCollection 2022.

Hierarchical multi-class Alzheimer's disease diagnostic framework using imaging 
and clinical features.

Qin Y(1), Cui J(1), Ge X(1), Tian Y(2), Han H(1), Fan Z(3), Liu L(1), Luo Y(1), 
Yu H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, China.
(3)Center of Translational Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanxi 
Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(4)Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Major Diseases Risk Assessment, Taiyuan, 
China.

Due to the clinical continuum of Alzheimer's disease (AD), the accuracy of early 
diagnostic remains unsatisfactory and warrants further research. The objectives 
of this study were: (1) to develop an effective hierarchical multi-class 
framework for clinical populations, namely, normal cognition (NC), early mild 
cognitive impairment (EMCI), late mild cognitive impairment (LMCI), and AD, and 
(2) to explore the geometric properties of cognition-related anatomical 
structures in the cerebral cortex. A total of 1,670 participants were enrolled 
in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, comprising 
985 participants (314 NC, 208 EMCI, 258 LMCI, and 205 AD) in the model 
development set and 685 participants (417 NC, 110 EMCI, 83 LMCI, and 75 AD) 
after 2017 in the temporal validation set. Four cortical geometric properties 
for 148 anatomical structures were extracted, namely, cortical thickness (CTh), 
fractal dimension (FD), gyrification index (GI), and sulcus depth (SD). By 
integrating these imaging features with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scores at four-time points after the initial visit, we identified an optimal 
subset of 40 imaging features using the temporally constrained group sparse 
learning method. The combination of selected imaging features and clinical 
variables improved the multi-class performance using the AdaBoost algorithm, 
with overall accuracy rates of 0.877 in the temporal validation set. Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR) was the primary clinical variable associated with 
AD-related populations. The most discriminative imaging features included the 
bilateral CTh of the dorsal part of the posterior cingulate gyrus, 
parahippocampal gyrus (PHG), parahippocampal part of the medial 
occipito-temporal gyrus, and angular gyrus, the GI of the left inferior segment 
of the insula circular sulcus, and the CTh and SD of the left superior temporal 
sulcus (STS). Our hierarchical multi-class framework underscores the utility of 
combining cognitive variables with imaging features and the reliability of 
surface-based morphometry, facilitating more accurate early diagnosis of AD in 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2022 Qin, Cui, Ge, Tian, Han, Fan, Liu, Luo and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.935055
PMCID: PMC9399682
PMID: 36034132

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


118. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 25;14(2):e0212435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212435. 
eCollection 2019.

Evaluating trajectories of episodic memory in normal cognition and mild 
cognitive impairment: Results from ADNI.

Ding X(1), Charnigo RJ(2)(3), Schmitt FA(4)(5), Kryscio RJ(2)(3)(4), Abner 
EL(3)(4)(6); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Western Kentucky University, Department of Public Health, Bowling Green, 
Kentucky, United States of America.
(2)University of Kentucky, Department of Statistics, Lexington, Kentucky, United 
States of America.
(3)University of Kentucky, Department of Biostatistics, Lexington, Kentucky, 
United States of America.
(4)University of Kentucky, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Lexington, Kentucky, 
United States of America.
(5)University of Kentucky, Department of Neurology, Lexington, Kentucky, United 
States of America.
(6)University of Kentucky, Department of Epidemiology, Lexington, Kentucky, 
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Memory assessment is a key factor for the diagnosis of cognitive 
impairment. However, memory performance over time may be quite heterogeneous 
within diagnostic groups.
METHOD: To identify latent trajectories in memory performance and their 
associated risk factors, we analyzed data from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) participants who were classified either as cognitively normal 
or as Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) at baseline and were administered the Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning test (RAVLT) for up to 9 years. Group-based trajectory 
modeling on the 30-minute RAVLT delayed recall score was applied separately to 
the two baseline diagnostic groups.
RESULTS: There were 219 normal subjects with mean age 75.9 (range from 59.9 to 
89.6) and 52.5% male participants, and 372 MCI subjects with mean age 74.8 
(range from 55.1 to 89.3) and 63.7% male participants included in the analysis. 
For normal subjects, six trajectories were identified. Trajectories were 
classified into three types, determined by the shape, each of which may comprise 
more than one trajectory: stable (~30% of subjects), curvilinear decline (~ 
28%), and linear decline (~ 42%). Notably, none of the normal subjects assigned 
to the stable stratum progressed to dementia during the study period. In 
contrast, all trajectories identified for the MCI group tended to decline, 
although some participants were later re-diagnosed with normal cognition. Age, 
sex, and education were significantly associated with trajectory membership for 
both diagnostic groups, while APOE ɛ4 was only significantly associated with 
trajectories among MCI participants.
CONCLUSION: Memory trajectory is a strong indicator of dementia risk. If likely 
trajectory of memory performance can be identified early, such work may allow 
clinicians to monitor or predict progression of individual patient cognition. 
This work also shows the importance of longitudinal cognitive testing and 
monitoring.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212435
PMCID: PMC6389289
PMID: 30802256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Although the data collection and sharing of the 
ADNI project were supported by some commercial funding, the data used in this 
project were retrieved from an open-access database, and data obtained were 
de-identified. The authors confirm that this does not alter their adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


119. J Genet. 2021;100:60.

Longitudinal analysis of APOE-ɛ4 genotype with the logical memory delayed recall 
score in Alzheimer's disease.

Fokuoh E(1), Xiao D, Fang W, Liu Y, Lu Y, Wang K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, College of Public Health, East 
Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN 37614, USA 
kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.

No study has focussed on the longitudinal effect of APOE-ɛ4 genotype on the 
logical memory delayed recall total (LDELTOTAL) score in late-onset Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The LDELTOTAL scores were collected at baseline, 12, 24, 36 and 48 
months from 382 participants with AD, 503 with cognitive normal (CN), 1293 with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). A linear mixed model (LMM) was used to investigate the effect 
of APOE-ɛ4 on the longitudinal changes in the LDELTOTAL scores adjusted for age, 
gender, education and baseline Mini Mental State Examination score. There were 
significant differences in LDELTOTAL scores among AD, CN, and MCI (P<0.0001) and 
among APOE-ɛ4 alleles at baseline (P<0.0001). In the multivariable LMM, elders 
with 75+ years (P = 0.0051), females (P<0.0001), lower education (P<0.0001), AD 
and MCI (both P values <0.0001) were associated with decreased LDELTOTAL values, 
while the individuals with 1 or 2 APOE-ɛ4 allele revealed significantly lower 
LDELTOTAL scores (both P values<0.0001) compared with individuals without 
APOE-ɛ4 allele. Further, APOE-ɛ4 alleles had significant interactions with four 
follow-up visits, where all follow-up visits showed significantly higher 
LDELTOTAL score. In addition, gender showed interaction with age, education and 
APOE-ɛ4 with follow-up visits. Our findings provide the first evidence of the 
effect of APOE-ɛ4 genotype on the logical memory declines related to AD. 
Further, APOE-ɛ4 alleles showed interactions with gender and follow-up visits.

PMID: 34470924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Brain Sci. 2022 Oct 13;12(10):1383. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12101383.

Macrostructural and Microstructural White Matter Alterations Are Associated with 
Apathy across the Clinical Alzheimer's Disease Spectrum.

Manca R(1), Jones SA(2), Venneri A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Brunel University London, Uxbridge UB8 3BH, UK.
(2)Rotherham Doncaster and South Humber NHS Foundation Trust, Rotherham DN4 8QN, 
UK.
(3)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, 43126 Parma, Italy.

Apathy is the commonest neuropsychiatric symptom in Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Previous findings suggest that apathy is caused by a communication breakdown 
between functional neural networks involved in motivational-affective 
processing. This study investigated the relationship between white matter (WM) 
damage and apathy in AD. Sixty-one patients with apathy (AP-PT) and 61 without 
apathy (NA-PT) were identified from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database and matched for cognitive status, age and education. 
Sixty-one cognitively unimpaired (CU) participants were also included as 
controls. Data on cognitive performance, cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers, 
brain/WM hyperintensity volumes and diffusion tensor imaging indices were 
compared across groups. No neurocognitive differences were found between patient 
groups, but the AP-PT group had more severe neuropsychiatric symptoms. Compared 
with CU participants, only apathetic patients had deficits on the Clock Drawing 
Test. AP-PT had increased WM damage, both macrostructurally, i.e., larger WM 
hyperintensity volume, and microstructurally, i.e., increased radial/axial 
diffusivity and reduced fractional anisotropy in the fornix, cingulum, anterior 
thalamic radiations and superior longitudinal and uncinate fasciculi. AP-PT 
showed signs of extensive WM damage, especially in associative tracts in the 
frontal lobes, fornix and cingulum. Disruption in structural connectivity might 
affect crucial functional inter-network communication, resulting in motivational 
deficits and worse cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci12101383
PMCID: PMC9599811
PMID: 36291317

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


121. JAMA. 2017 Jun 13;317(22):2305-2316. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.6669.

Association Between Elevated Brain Amyloid and Subsequent Cognitive Decline 
Among Cognitively Normal Persons.

Donohue MC(1), Sperling RA(2), Petersen R(3), Sun CK(1), Weiner MW(4), Aisen 
PS(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, Department of Neurology, 
University of Southern California, San Diego.
(2)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts3Department of Neurology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Center for Imaging of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of 
California-San Francisco7San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, 
California.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2017 Jun 13;317(22):2285-2287. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.6895.
    JAMA. 2017 Oct 10;318(14):1392-1393. doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.12951.

IMPORTANCE: Among cognitively normal individuals, elevated brain amyloid 
(defined by cerebrospinal fluid assays or positron emission tomography regional 
summaries) can be related to risk for later Alzheimer-related cognitive decline.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize and quantify the risk for Alzheimer-related cognitive 
decline among cognitively normal individuals with elevated brain amyloid.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Exploratory analyses were conducted with 
longitudinal cognitive and biomarker data from 445 cognitively normal 
individuals in the United States and Canada. Participants were observed from 
August 23, 2005, to June 7, 2016, for a median of 3.1 years (interquartile 
range, 2.0-4.2 years; maximum follow-up, 10.3 years) as part of the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
EXPOSURES: Individuals were classified at baseline as having normal (n = 243) or 
elevated (n = 202) brain amyloid using positron emission tomography amyloid 
imaging or a cerebrospinal fluid assay of amyloid β.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Outcomes included scores on the Preclinical 
Alzheimer Cognitive Composite (PACC; a sum of 4 baseline standardized z scores, 
which decreases with worse performance), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; 0 
[worst] to 30 [best] points), Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-Sum of 
Boxes; 0 [best] to 18 [worst] points), and Logical Memory Delayed Recall (0 
[worst] to 25 [best] story units).
RESULTS: Among the 445 participants (243 with normal amyloid, 202 with elevated 
amyloid), mean (SD) age was 74.0 (5.9) years, mean education was 16.4 (2.7) 
years, and 52% were women. The mean score for PACC at baseline was 0.00 (2.60); 
for MMSE, 29.0 (1.2); for CDR-Sum of Boxes, 0.04 (0.14); and for Logical Memory 
Delayed Recall, 13.1 (3.3). Compared with the group with normal amyloid, those 
with elevated amyloid had worse mean scores at 4 years on the PACC (mean 
difference, 1.51 points [95% CI, 0.94-2.10]; P < .001), MMSE (mean difference, 
0.56 points [95% CI, 0.32-0.80]; P < .001), and CDR-Sum of Boxes (mean 
difference, 0.23 points [95% CI, 0.08-0.38]; P = .002). For Logical Memory 
Delayed Recall, between-group score was not statistically significant at 4 years 
(mean difference, 0.73 story units [95% CI, -0.02 to 1.48]; P = .056).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Exploratory analyses of a cognitively normal cohort 
followed up for a median of 3.1 years suggest that elevation in baseline brain 
amyloid level, compared with normal brain amyloid level, was associated with 
higher likelihood of cognitive decline, although the findings are of uncertain 
clinical significance. Further research is needed to assess the clinical 
importance of these differences and measure longer-term associations.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2017.6669
PMCID: PMC5736301
PMID: 28609533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors 
have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest.


122. Neuroimage. 2024 Apr 15;292:120609. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120609. Epub 
2024 Apr 12.

Disentangling sex-dependent effects of APOE on diverse trajectories of cognitive 
decline in Alzheimer's disease.

Ma H(1), Shi Z(2), Kim M(3), Liu B(4), Smith PJ(2), Liu Y(5), Wu G(6); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, 
NC 27412, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics and Data Science, School of Management at Fudan 
University, Shanghai, 200433, PR China.
(5)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Genetics, Department of 
Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 
Electronic address: yfliu@email.unc.edu.
(6)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Computer Science, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; UNC Neuroscience 
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic 
address: grwu@med.unc.edu.

Current diagnostic systems for Alzheimer's disease (AD) rely upon clinical signs 
and symptoms, despite the fact that the multiplicity of clinical symptoms 
renders various neuropsychological assessments inadequate to reflect the 
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. Since putative neuroimaging biomarkers 
play a crucial role in understanding the etiology of AD, we sought to stratify 
the diverse relationships between AD biomarkers and cognitive decline in the 
aging population and uncover risk factors contributing to the diversities in AD. 
To do so, we capitalized on a large amount of neuroimaging data from the ADNI 
study to examine the inflection points along the dynamic relationship between 
cognitive decline trajectories and whole-brain neuroimaging biomarkers, using a 
state-of-the-art statistical model of change point detection. Our findings 
indicated that the temporal relationship between AD biomarkers and cognitive 
decline may differ depending on the synergistic effect of genetic risk and 
biological sex. Specifically, tauopathy-PET biomarkers exhibit a more dynamic 
and age-dependent association with Mini-Mental State Examination scores 
(p<0.05), with inflection points at 72, 78, and 83 years old, compared with 
amyloid-PET and neurodegeneration (cortical thickness from MRI) biomarkers. In 
the landscape of health disparities in AD, our analysis indicated that 
biological sex moderates the rate of cognitive decline associated with APOE4 
genotype. Meanwhile, we found that higher education levels may moderate the 
effect of APOE4, acting as a marker of cognitive reserve.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120609
PMCID: PMC11069285
PMID: 38614371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.


123. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2018 Nov 26;4:645-651. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.10.004. 
eCollection 2018.

Clinical and cognitive characteristics of preclinical Alzheimer's disease in the 
Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort.

Ihara R(1)(2), Iwata A(3), Suzuki K(1), Ikeuchi T(4), Kuwano R(4), Iwatsubo 
T(1)(5); Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Innovative Dementia Prevention, Graduate School of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Bioresource Science Branch, Center for 
Bioresources, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to determine the frequency and 
clinical and cognitive characteristics of preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
in a Japanese population to effectively design and conduct future preventive 
trials on preclinical AD.
METHODS: Three-year longitudinal data from cognitively normal participants who 
underwent cerebrospinal fluid biomarker measurement and/or amyloid positron 
emission tomography in the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 
were analyzed. Comparisons between participants with and without amyloid β (Aβ) 
accumulation, and between those with and without elevated tau levels tau among 
participants with Aβ accumulation were performed.
RESULTS: Among 84 participants with available cerebrospinal fluid biomarker 
and/or amyloid positron emission tomography data, 19 (22.6%) exhibited Aβ 
accumulation. The frequency of APOE ε4 alleles was significantly higher in 
participants with Aβ accumulation. There were no significant differences in any 
of the cognitive tests at the baseline; however, participants with Aβ 
accumulation exhibited a decline in clock drawing test (linear mixed-effects 
model, P = .008) and a tendency toward loss of practice effects in the 
Mini-Mental State Examination and the logical memory over time. Although it did 
not reach statistical significance, the analysis indicated a decline in 
measurements of executive function over time in participants with elevated tau 
levels compared with those with normal tau levels.
DISCUSSION: The frequency of preclinical AD in the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative was lower than in similar studies because of the younger 
age of the participants and lower frequency of APOE ε4 carriage. Although 
limitations in sample size precluded definitive conclusions, the results suggest 
that even in the preclinical phase of AD, loss of practice effects in episodic 
memory tests and at a later stage, decline in executive function, are present. 
These findings may be useful for recruitment of individuals with preclinical AD 
and establishing a novel cognitive composite for use in clinical trials on 
preclinical AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.10.004
PMCID: PMC6258138
PMID: 30511010


124. J Neuroimaging. 2019 May;29(3):376-382. doi: 10.1111/jon.12598. Epub 2019 Jan 
14.

Semiautomated Assessment of the Anterior Cingulate Cortex in Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Jung F(1), Kazemifar S(2), Bartha R(2), Rajakumar N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Biophysics, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is involved in 
several cognitive processes including executive function. Degenerative changes 
of ACC are consistently seen in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, volumetric 
changes specific to the ACC in AD are not clear because of the difficulty in 
segmenting this region. The objectives of the current study were to develop a 
precise and high-throughput approach for measuring ACC volumes and to correlate 
the relationship between ACC volume and cognitive function in AD.
METHODS: Structural T1 -weighted magnetic resonance images of AD patients (n = 
47) and age-matched controls (n = 47) at baseline and at 24 months were obtained 
from the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) database and studied 
using a custom-designed semiautomated segmentation protocol.
RESULTS: ACC volumes obtained using the semiautomated protocol were highly 
correlated to values obtained from manual segmentation (r = .98) and the 
semiautomated protocol was considerably faster. When comparing AD and control 
subjects, no significant differences were observed in baseline ACC volumes or in 
change in ACC volumes over 24 months using the two segmentation methods. 
However, a change in ACC volume over 24 months did not correlate with a change 
in mini-mental state examination scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the proposed semiautomated segmentation 
protocol is reliable for determining ACC volume in neurodegenerative conditions 
including AD.

© 2019 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.12598
PMID: 30640412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Dec;32(12):2322.e19-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.023. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Prediction of MCI to AD conversion, via MRI, CSF biomarkers, and pattern 
classification.

Davatzikos C(1), Bhatt P, Shaw LM, Batmanghelich KN, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Biomedical Image Analysis, Department of Radiology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. christos@rad.upenn.edu

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) patterns were examined together with 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in serial scans of Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) participants with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI). The SPARE-AD score, summarizing brain atrophy patterns, was tested as a 
predictor of short-term conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD). MCI individuals 
that converted to AD (MCI-C) had mostly positive baseline SPARE-AD (Spatial 
Pattern of Abnormalities for Recognition of Early AD) and atrophy in temporal 
lobe gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM), posterior cingulate/precuneous, and 
insula. MCI individuals that converted to AD had mostly AD-like baseline CSF 
biomarkers. MCI nonconverters (MCI-NC) had mixed baseline SPARE-AD and CSF 
values, suggesting that some MCI-NC subjects may later convert. Those MCI-NC 
with most negative baseline SPARE-AD scores (normal brain structure) had 
significantly higher baseline Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores 
(28.67) than others, and relatively low annual rate of Mini Mental State 
Examination decrease (-0.25). MCI-NC with midlevel baseline SPARE-AD displayed 
faster annual rates of SPARE-AD increase (indicating progressing atrophy). 
SPARE-AD and CSF combination improved prediction over individual values. In 
summary, both SPARE-AD and CSF biomarkers showed high baseline sensitivity, 
however, many MCI-NC had abnormal baseline SPARE-AD and CSF biomarkers. Longer 
follow-up will elucidate the specificity of baseline measurements.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.05.023
PMCID: PMC2951483
PMID: 20594615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2020 Mar-Apr;17(2):608-622. doi: 
10.1109/TCBB.2018.2870363. Epub 2018 Sep 14.

Gene Expressions, Hippocampal Volume Loss, and MMSE Scores in Computation of 
Progression and Pharmacologic Therapy Effects for Alzheimer's Disease.

Saribudak A, Subick AA, Kim NH, Rutta JA, Uyar MU.

We build personalized relevance parameterization method (prep-ad) based on 
artificial intelligence (ai) techniques to compute Alzheimer's disease (ad) 
progression for patients at the mild cognitive impairment (mci) stage. 
Expressions of ad related genes, mini mental state examination (mmse) scores, 
and hippocampal volume measurements of mci patients are obtained from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (adni) database. In evaluation of 
cognitive changes under pharmacological therapies, patients are grouped based on 
available clinical measurements and the type of therapy administered, namely 
donepezil monotherapy and polytherapy of donepezil with memantine. Average leave 
one out cross validation (loocv) error rates are calculated for prep-ad results 
as less than 8 percent when mmse scores are used to compute disease progression 
for a 60 month period, and 3 percent with hippocampal volume measurements for 12 
months. Statistical significance is calculated as p = 0.003 for using ad related 
genes in disease progression and as for the results computed by prep-ad. These 
relatively small average loocv errors and p-values suggest that our prep-ad 
methods employing gene expressions, mmse scores and hippocampal volume loss 
measurements can be useful in supporting pharmacologic therapy decisions during 
early stages of ad.

DOI: 10.1109/TCBB.2018.2870363
PMCID: PMC7241288
PMID: 31722481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors do not declare 
any conflict of interest.


127. Behav Neurol. 2017;2017:1850909. doi: 10.1155/2017/1850909. Epub 2017 Jan 31.

Optimizing Neuropsychological Assessments for Cognitive, Behavioral, and 
Functional Impairment Classification: A Machine Learning Study.

Battista P(1), Salvatore C(1), Castiglioni I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, National Research Council 
(IBFM-CNR), Segrate, Milano, Italy.

Subjects with Alzheimer's disease (AD) show loss of cognitive functions and 
change in behavioral and functional state affecting the quality of their daily 
life and that of their families and caregivers. A neuropsychological assessment 
plays a crucial role in detecting such changes from normal conditions. However, 
despite the existence of clinical measures that are used to classify and 
diagnose AD, a large amount of subjectivity continues to exist. Our aim was to 
assess the potential of machine learning in quantifying this process and 
optimizing or even reducing the amount of neuropsychological tests used to 
classify AD patients, also at an early stage of impairment. We investigated the 
role of twelve state-of-the-art neuropsychological tests in the automatic 
classification of subjects with none, mild, or severe impairment as measured by 
the clinical dementia rating (CDR). Data were obtained from the ADNI database. 
In the groups of measures used as features, we included measures of both 
cognitive domains and subdomains. Our findings show that some tests are more 
frequently best predictors for the automatic classification, namely, LM, 
ADAS-Cog, AVLT, and FAQ, with a major role of the ADAS-Cog measures of delayed 
and immediate memory and the FAQ measure of financial competency.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/1850909
PMCID: PMC5307249
PMID: 28255200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests regarding the publication of this paper.


128. Brain Sci. 2022 Nov 15;12(11):1555. doi: 10.3390/brainsci12111555.

Altered Functional Connectivity of Basal Ganglia in Mild Cognitive Impairment 
and Alzheimer's Disease.

Xiong Y(1), Ye C(1), Chen Y(1), Zhong X(1), Chen H(2), Sun R(1), Zhang J(1), 
Zhong Z(1), Huang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Shenzhen 518107, China.
(2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China.

(1) Background: Alzheimer's disease (AD), an age-progressive neurodegenerative 
disease that affects cognitive function, causes changes in the functional 
connectivity of the default-mode network (DMN). However, the question of whether 
AD-related changes occur in the functional connectivity of the basal ganglia has 
rarely been specifically analyzed. This study aimed to measure the changes in 
basal ganglia functional connectivity among patients with AD and mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) in their resting state using the functional connectivity 
density (FCD) value, the functional connectivity (FC) intensity, and the graph 
theory index, and to confirm their influence on clinical manifestations. (2) 
Methods: Resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) and neuropsychological data from 
48 participants in the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were 
used for analyses. The 48 ADNI participants comprised 16 patients with AD, 16 
patients with MCI, and 16 normal controls (NCs). The functional connectivity of 
basal ganglia was evaluated by FCDs, FC strength, and graph theory index. We 
compared voxel-based FCD values between groups to show specific regions with 
significant variation and significant connectivity from ROI conduction to ROI 
analysis. Pearson's correlation analyses between functional connectivity and 
several simultaneous clinical variables were also conducted. Additionally, 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses associated with classification 
were conducted for both FCD values and graph theory indices. (3) Results: The 
level of FCD in patients with cognitive impairment showed obvious abnormalities 
(including short-range and long-range FCD). In addition to DMN-related regions, 
aberrant functional connectivity was also found to be present in the basal 
ganglia, especially in the caudate and amygdala. The FCD values of the basal 
ganglia (involving the caudate and amygdala) were closely related to scores from 
the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Functional Activities 
Questionnaire (FAQ); meanwhile, the graph theory indices (involving global 
efficiency and degree) of the basal ganglia (involving the caudate, amygdala, 
and putamen) were also found to be closely correlated with MMSE scores. In ROC 
analyses of both FCD and graph theory, the amygdala was of the utmost importance 
in the early-stage detection of MCI; additionally, the caudate nucleus was found 
to be crucial in the progression of cognitive decline and AD diagnosis. (4) 
Conclusions: It was systematically confirmed that there is a phenomenon of 
change in the functional connections in the basal ganglia during cognitive 
decline. The findings of this study could improve our understanding of AD and 
MCI pathology in the basal ganglia and make it possible to propose new targets 
for AD treatment in further studies.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci12111555
PMCID: PMC9688931
PMID: 36421879

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


129. Neuroimage. 2010 Jul 15;51(4):1405-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.051. 
Epub 2010 Mar 25.

Predicting clinical scores from magnetic resonance scans in Alzheimer's disease.

Stonnington CM(1), Chu C, Klöppel S, Jack CR Jr, Ashburner J, Frackowiak RS; 
Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ , USA. 
stonnington.cynthia@mayo.edu

Machine learning and pattern recognition methods have been used to diagnose 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from individual MRI 
scans. Another application of such methods is to predict clinical scores from 
individual scans. Using relevance vector regression (RVR), we predicted 
individuals' performances on established tests from their MRI T1 weighted image 
in two independent data sets. From Mayo Clinic, 73 probable AD patients and 91 
cognitively normal (CN) controls completed the Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), Dementia Rating Scale (DRS), and Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) 
within 3months of their scan. Baseline MRI's from the Alzheimer's disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) comprised the other data set; 113 AD, 351 MCI, 
and 122 CN subjects completed the MMSE and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive subtest (ADAS-cog) and 39 AD, 92 MCI, and 32 CN ADNI subjects 
completed MMSE, ADAS-cog, and AVLT. Predicted and actual clinical scores were 
highly correlated for the MMSE, DRS, and ADAS-cog tests (P<0.0001). Training 
with one data set and testing with another demonstrated stability between data 
sets. DRS, MMSE, and ADAS-Cog correlated better than AVLT with whole brain grey 
matter changes associated with AD. This result underscores their utility for 
screening and tracking disease. RVR offers a novel way to measure interactions 
between structural changes and neuropsychological tests beyond that of 
univariate methods. In clinical practice, we envision using RVR to aid in 
diagnosis and predict clinical outcome.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.03.051
PMCID: PMC2871976
PMID: 20347044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest or 
financial involvement with this manuscript.


130. Brain Imaging Behav. 2016 Sep;10(3):818-28. doi: 10.1007/s11682-015-9430-4.

Canonical feature selection for joint regression and multi-class identification 
in Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

Zhu X(1), Suk HI(2), Lee SW(2), Shen D(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and BRIC, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Radiology and BRIC, The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. dgshen@med.unc.edu.
(4)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, 
Republic of Korea. dgshen@med.unc.edu.

Fusing information from different imaging modalities is crucial for more 
accurate identification of the brain state because imaging data of different 
modalities can provide complementary perspectives on the complex nature of brain 
disorders. However, most existing fusion methods often extract features 
independently from each modality, and then simply concatenate them into a long 
vector for classification, without appropriate consideration of the correlation 
among modalities. In this paper, we propose a novel method to transform the 
original features from different modalities to a common space, where the 
transformed features become comparable and easy to find their relation, by 
canonical correlation analysis. We then perform the sparse multi-task learning 
for discriminative feature selection by using the canonical features as 
regressors and penalizing a loss function with a canonical regularizer. In our 
experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset, 
we use Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) 
images to jointly predict clinical scores of Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
also identify multi-class disease status for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis. The 
experimental results showed that the proposed canonical feature selection method 
helped enhance the performance of both clinical score prediction and disease 
status identification, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-015-9430-4
PMCID: PMC4747862
PMID: 26254746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests Xiaofeng Zhu, Heung-Il Suk 
and Dinggang Shen declare that they have no conflict of interests.


131. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2020 Mar 20;6(1):e12007. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12007. 
eCollection 2020.

Effect of apolipoprotein E ε4 allele on the progression of cognitive decline in 
the early stage of Alzheimer's disease.

Suzuki K(1), Hirakawa A(2), Ihara R(1), Iwata A(3), Ishii K(4), Ikeuchi T(5), 
Sun CK(6), Donohue M(6), Iwatsubo T(1)(7); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative, Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development The University of Tokyo 
Hospital Tokyo Japan.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Graduate School of Medicine 
The University of Tokyo Tokyo Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology The University of Tokyo Hospital Tokyo Japan.
(4)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology Tokyo Japan.
(5)Niigata University Niigata Japan.
(6)Alzheimer's Therapeutics Research Institute University of Southern California 
San Diego California.
(7)Department of Neuropathology Graduate School of Medicine The University of 
Tokyo Tokyo Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Possession of the apolipoprotein E (APO E) ε4 allele advances 
amyloid β (Aβ) deposition and symptomatic onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
whereas its effect on the rate of cognitive decline remained controversial. We 
examined the effects of APOE ε4 allele on cognition in biomarker-confirmed late 
mild cognitive impairment (LMCI) and mild AD subjects in the Japanese 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (J-ADNI) and North American ADNI 
(NA-ADNI).
METHODS: The "early AD" (ie, combined LMCI and mild AD) cohort of 649 subjects 
from J-ADNI and NA-ADNI were selected based on positivity of Aβ confirmed by 
amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) or cerebrospinal fluid testing. The 
rates of cognitive decline in the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), the 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB), and the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13 (ADAS-Cog) from baseline were examined 
using mixed-effects model. The effect of ε4 on time to conversion to dementia 
was also analyzed in LMCI using the Kaplan-Meier estimator and log-rank test.
RESULTS: The rates of cognitive decline were not significantly different between 
ε4 carriers and ε4 non-carriers in the total early AD cohort, which were 
affected neither by region nor by the number of ε4 alleles. In LMCI, ε4 carriers 
showed almost the same progression rates as ε4 non-carriers, except for a 
significantly faster decline in MMSE (P = .0282). Time to conversion to demenita 
was not significantly different between ε4 carriers and ε4 non-carriers. In 
ε4-positive mild AD, the rates of decline in MMSE (P = .003) and CDR-SB 
(P = .0071) were slower than those in ε4 non-carriers.
DISCUSSION: The APOE ε4 allele had little effect on the rates of cognitive 
decline in the overall biomarker-confirmed early AD, regardless of region and 
number of ε4 alleles, with a slight variability in different clinical stages, 
the ε4 allele being slightly accelerative in LMCI, while decelerative in mild 
AD.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12007
PMCID: PMC7087431
PMID: 32211510


132. Exp Brain Res. 2021 Sep;239(9):2925-2937. doi: 10.1007/s00221-021-06182-w. Epub 
2021 Jul 27.

Harnessing forgetfulness: can episodic-memory tests predict early Alzheimer's 
disease?

Warren SL(1), Moustafa AA(2)(3), Alashwal H(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia. 
19466949@student.westernsydney.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia.
(3)MARCS Institute for Brain and Behaviour, Western Sydney University, Sydney, 
Australia.
(4)College of Information Technology, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, 
15551, United Arab Emirates.

A rapid increase in the number of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) is 
expected over the next decades. Accordingly, there is a critical need for 
early-stage AD detection methods that can enable effective treatment strategies. 
In this study, we consider the ability of episodic-memory measures to predict 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD conversion and thus, detect early-stage 
AD. For our analysis, we studied 307 participants with MCI across four years 
using data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Using a 
binary logistic regression, we compared episodic-memory tests to each other and 
to prominent neuroimaging methods in MCI converter (MCI participants who 
developed AD) and MCI non-converter groups (MCI participants who did not develop 
AD). We also combined variables to test the accuracy of mixed-predictor models. 
Our results indicated that the best predictors of MCI to AD conversion were the 
following: a combined episodic-memory and neuroimaging model in year one 
(59.8%), the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test in year two (71.7%), a mixed 
episodic-memory predictor model in year three (77.7%) and the Logical Memory 
Test in year four (77.2%) of ADNI. Overall, we found that individual 
episodic-memory measure and mixed models performed similarly when predicting MCI 
to AD conversion. Comparatively, individual neuroimaging measures predicted MCI 
conversion worse than chance. Accordingly, our results indicate that 
episodic-memory tests could be instrumental in detecting early-stage AD and 
enabling effective treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-021-06182-w
PMID: 34313791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;56(3):947-957. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160716.

Does the Female Advantage in Verbal Memory Contribute to Underestimating 
Alzheimer's Disease Pathology in Women versus Men?

Sundermann EE(1), Biegon A(2), Rubin LH(3), Lipton RB(1), Landau S(4), Maki 
PM(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, State University of New York, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(4)Einstein Aging Study and the Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

There is a growing recognition of sex differences in Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Females show an advantage over males on tests of verbal memory, which are used 
to diagnose AD and its precursor, amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). 
Women retain this advantage in aMCI despite reduced hippocampal volume and 
temporal lobe glucose metabolism. Here we examined whether this female advantage 
endures despite evidence of AD-specific pathology, cortical amyloid-β (Aβ) 
deposition measured with [18F]AV45 (florbetapir) positron emission tomography. 
Participants with normal cognition (N = 304), aMCI (N = 515), and AD dementia 
(N = 175) were drawn from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). Across and within diagnostic groups, we conducted linear regressions to 
examine the interaction of sex with cortical Aβ burden on immediate and delayed 
recall on the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) adjusting for age, 
education, and APOE4. In the overall group, sex by cortical Aβ interaction was 
significant for delayed recall only. Overall, delayed recall performance was 
significantly better in women versus men among those with low to moderate Aβ 
burden, but women and men performed similarly among those with high Aβ burden. 
In diagnosis-stratified analyses, a significant sex by cortical Aβ interaction 
was observed for delayed recall in the aMCI group, but not in the normal or AD 
dementia groups. Thus, women maintain a verbal memory advantage over men in aMCI 
despite similar levels of AD pathology. Although this advantage may benefit 
women by delaying verbal memory impairment until more advanced pathology, it may 
also delay diagnosis of aMCI and treatment intervention.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160716
PMCID: PMC7644197
PMID: 28106548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Dr. Sundermann reports no 
disclosures. Dr. Maki reports no disclosures. Dr. Rubin reports no disclosures. 
Dr. Lipton reports research support from the NIH: PO1 AG003949 (Program 
Director), PO1AG027734 (Project Leader), RO1AG025119 (Investigator), 
RO1AG022374–06A2 (Investigator), RO1AG034119 (Investigator), RO1AG12101 
(Investigator) and has reviewed for the NIA and NINDS, Dr. Landau reports no 
disclosures. Dr. Biegon reports no disclosures.


134. Front Neurol. 2019 Aug 20;10:900. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00900. eCollection 
2019.

Sex Moderates Amyloid and Apolipoprotein ε4 Effects on Default Mode Network 
Connectivity at Rest.

Caldwell JZK(1), Zhuang X(1), Leavitt MJ(1), Banks SJ(2), Cummings J(1)(3), 
Cordes D(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, NV, United 
States.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, United States.
(3)UNLV School of Allied Health Sciences, Las Vegas, NV, United States.

Women are more likely to have Alzheimer's disease (AD) and decline more rapidly 
once diagnosed despite greater verbal memory early in the disease compared to 
men-an advantage that has been termed "memory reserve." Resting state functional 
MRI (fMRI) investigations demonstrate interactions between sex and AD risk 
factors in default mode network (DMN) connectivity, a network of brain regions 
showing progressive dysfunction in AD. Separate work suggests connectivity of 
left prefrontal cortex (PFC) may correlate with more general cognitive reserve 
in healthy aging. It is unknown whether left prefrontal functional connectivity 
with anterior and posterior default mode network (aDMN, pDMN) might differ by 
sex in AD. This study employed group independent component analysis (ICA) to 
analyze resting state fMRI data from 158 participants from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) with baseline diagnoses of normal 
cognition or early mild cognitive impairment (eMCI). pDMN and aDMN were defined 
on a subject-specific basis; prefrontal areas were selected from the Brodmann 
atlas (BA 6, 44, 8, and 9). Moderation regression analyses examined whether sex 
and amyloid PET positivity (A+/-) moderated effects of apolipoprotein ε4 (APOE 
ε4) on connectivity between left PFC, aDMN, and pDMN; and between aDMN and pDMN. 
Significant analyses were followed up with partial correlations assessing 
relationship of connectivity to verbal memory on the Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test (RAVLT), and with preliminary analyses within NC and eMCI groups 
separately. Results showed no sex moderation of effects of A+ and APOE ε4 on 
left prefrontal/DMN connectivity in the full sample. However, sex significantly 
moderated impact of A+ and APOE ε4 on connectivity between aDMN and pDMN (p < 
0.01). Women with an APOE allele (ε4+) and A+ showed greater aDMN/pDMN 
connectivity than their ε4- counterparts. No significant results were observed 
in men. Subgroup analyses suggested the aDMN/pDMN finding was true for those 
with NC, not eMCI. Partial correlations controlling for age and education showed 
increased aDMN/pDMN connectivity related to better verbal learning in women (p < 
0.01) and not men (p = 0.18). In women at risk for AD or in early symptomatic 
stages who also have evidence of amyloid burden, stronger aDMN/pDMN connectivity 
may support verbal learning.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00900
PMCID: PMC6710397
PMID: 31481928


135. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2017 Apr 26;9(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s13195-017-0260-z.

Comparison of CSF markers and semi-quantitative amyloid PET in Alzheimer's 
disease diagnosis and in cognitive impairment prognosis using the ADNI-2 
database.

Ben Bouallègue F(1)(2)(3), Mariano-Goulart D(4), Payoux P(5)(6); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Toulouse NeuroImaging Centre (ToNIC), Université de Toulouse, Inserm/UPS, 
Toulouse, France. faybenb@hotmail.com.
(2)Nuclear Medicine Department, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France. 
faybenb@hotmail.com.
(3)Nuclear Medicine Department, Lapeyronie University Hospital, Montpellier, 
France. faybenb@hotmail.com.
(4)Nuclear Medicine Department, Lapeyronie University Hospital, Montpellier, 
France.
(5)Toulouse NeuroImaging Centre (ToNIC), Université de Toulouse, Inserm/UPS, 
Toulouse, France.
(6)Nuclear Medicine Department, Purpan University Hospital, Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: The relative performance of semi-quantitative amyloid positron 
emission tomography (PET) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers in diagnosing 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and predicting the cognitive evolution of patients with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is still debated.
METHODS: Subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 2 with 
complete baseline cognitive assessment (Mini Mental State Examination, Clinical 
Dementia Rating [CDR] and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
Subscale [ADAS-cog] scores), CSF collection (amyloid-β1-42 [Aβ], tau and 
phosphorylated tau) and 18F-florbetapir scans were included in our 
cross-sectional cohort. Among these, patients with MCI or substantial memory 
complaints constituted our longitudinal cohort and were followed for 
30 ± 16 months. PET amyloid deposition was quantified using relative retention 
indices (standardised uptake value ratio [SUVr]) with respect to pontine, 
cerebellar and composite reference regions. Diagnostic and prognostic 
performance based on PET and CSF was evaluated using ROC analysis, multivariate 
linear regression and survival analysis with the Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: The cross-sectional study included 677 participants and revealed that 
pontine and composite SUVr values were better classifiers (AUC 0.88, diagnostic 
accuracy 85%) than CSF markers (AUC 0.83 and 0.85, accuracy 80% and 75%, for Aβ 
and tau, respectively). SUVr was a strong independent determinant of cognition 
in multivariate regression, whereas Aβ was not; tau was also a determinant, but 
to a lesser degree. Among the 396 patients from the longitudinal study, 82 (21%) 
converted to AD within 22 ± 13 months. Optimal SUVr thresholds to differentiate 
AD converters were quite similar to those of the cross-sectional study. 
Composite SUVr was the best AD classifier (AUC 0.86, sensitivity 88%, 
specificity 81%). In multivariate regression, baseline cognition (CDR and 
ADAS-cog) was the main predictor of subsequent cognitive decline. Pontine and 
composite SUVr were moderate but independent predictors of final status and 
CDR/ADAS-cog progression rate, whereas baseline CSF markers had a marginal 
influence. The adjusted HRs for AD conversion were 3.8 (p = 0.01) for PET 
profile, 1.2 (p = ns) for Aβ profile and 1.8 (p = 0.03) for tau profile.
CONCLUSIONS: Semi-quantitative amyloid PET appears more powerful than CSF 
markers for AD grading and MCI prognosis in terms of cognitive decline and AD 
conversion.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-017-0260-z
PMCID: PMC5405503
PMID: 28441967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2024;11(4):908-916. doi: 10.14283/jpad.2024.82.

Predicting Cognitive Decline for Non-Demented Adults with High Burden of Tau 
Pathology, Independent of Amyloid Status.

Wu HS(1), Li L, Sun QQ, Tan CC, Tan L, Xu W.

Author information:
(1)Dr. Wei Xu, MD, PhD, Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, 
Qingdao, China, Donghai Middle Road, No.5, Qingdao, China. E-mail address: 
dr_xuwei@qdu.edu.cn or 1037219730@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal tau proteins are independent contributors to cognitive 
impairment. Nevertheless, not all individuals exposed to high-level tau 
pathology will develop cognitive dysfunction. We aimed to construct a model to 
predict cognitive trajectory for this high-risk population.
METHOD: Longitudinal data of 181 non-demented adults (mean age= 73.1; female= 
45%), who were determined to have high cerebral burden of abnormal tau by 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) measurements of phosphorylated tau (ptau181) or total 
tau, were derived from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database. Cognitive decline was defined as Mini-Mental State Examination scores 
decline ≥ 3 over three years. A predictive nomogram was constructed using 
stepwise backward regression method. The discrimination, calibration, and 
clinical usefulness of the nomogram were evaluated. The model was validated in 
another 189 non-demented adults via a cross-sectional set (n=149, mean age = 
73.9, female = 51%) and a longitudinal set (n= 40, mean age = 75, female = 48%). 
Finally, the relationships of the calculated risk scores with cognitive decline 
and risk of Alzheimer's disease were examined during an extended 8-year 
follow-up.
RESULT: Lower volume of hippocampus (odds ratio [OR] = 0.37, p< 0.001), lower 
levels of CSF sTREM2 (OR = 0.76, p = 0.003), higher scores of Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive (OR = 1.15, p = 0.001) and Functional 
Activities Questionnaire (OR = 1.16, p = 0.016), and number of APOE ε4 (OR = 
1.88, p = 0.039) were associated with higher risk of cognitive decline 
independent of the amyloid status and were included in the final model. The 
nomogram had an area of under curve (AUC) value of 0.91 for training set, 0.93 
for cross-sectional validation set, and 0.91 for longitudinal validation set. 
Over the 8-year follow-up, the high-risk group exhibited faster cognitive 
decline (p< 0.001) and a higher risk of developing Alzheimer's dementia (HR= 
6.21, 95% CI= 3.61-10.66, p< 0.001 ).
CONCLUSION: APOE ε4 status, brain reserve capability, neuroinflammatory marker, 
and neuropsychological scores can help predict cognitive decline in non-demented 
adults with high burden of tau pathology, independent of the presence of amyloid 
pathology.

DOI: 10.14283/jpad.2024.82
PMID: 39044502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


137. J Neurol Sci. 2025 Jan 15;468:123361. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2024.123361. Epub 2024 
Dec 19.

Explainable machine learning on clinical features to predict and differentiate 
Alzheimer's progression by sex: Toward a clinician-tailored web interface.

D'Amore FM(1), Moscatelli M(2), Malvaso A(3), D'Antonio F(4), Rodini M(5), 
Panigutti M(4), Mirino P(6), Carlesimo GA(7), Guariglia C(4), Caligiore D(8).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Translational Neuroscience Laboratory, Institute of 
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CTNLab-ISTC-CNR), Via Gian Domenico Romagnosi 18A, Rome 00196, Italy.
(2)Research Area Milano 4, National Research Council (CNR - AdRMi4), Via 
Fratelli Cervi 93, Segrate (MI) 20054, Italy.
(3)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, 
National Neurological Institute, University of Pavia, Via Mondino 2, Pavia 
27100, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Del Fosso di Fiorano, 64, Rome 00143, 
Italy; Department of Psychology, Sapienza University, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 5, 
Rome 00185, Italy.
(5)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Del Fosso di Fiorano, 64, Rome 00143, 
Italy.
(6)Computational and Translational Neuroscience Laboratory, Institute of 
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CTNLab-ISTC-CNR), Via Gian Domenico Romagnosi 18A, Rome 00196, Italy; AI2Life 
s.r.l., Innovative Start-Up, ISTC-CNR Spin-Off, Via Sebino 32, Rome 00199, 
Italy.
(7)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Del Fosso di Fiorano, 64, Rome 00143, 
Italy; Department of System Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via 
Montpellier 1, Rome 00133, Italy.
(8)Computational and Translational Neuroscience Laboratory, Institute of 
Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council 
(CTNLab-ISTC-CNR), Via Gian Domenico Romagnosi 18A, Rome 00196, Italy; AI2Life 
s.r.l., Innovative Start-Up, ISTC-CNR Spin-Off, Via Sebino 32, Rome 00199, 
Italy. Electronic address: daniele.caligiore@istc.cnr.it.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common neurodegenerative disorder world-wide, 
presents sex-specific differences in its manifestation and progression, 
necessitating personalized diagnostic approaches. Current procedures are often 
costly and invasive, lacking consideration of sex-based differences. This study 
introduces an explainable machine learning (ML) system to predict and 
differentiate the progression of AD based on sex, using non-invasive, easily 
collectible predictors such as neuropsychological test scores and 
sociodemographic data, enabling its application in every day clinical settings. 
The ML model uses SHapley Additive explanations (SHAP) and Local Interpretable 
Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) to provide clear insights into its 
decision-making, making complex outcomes easier to interpret. The system 
includes a user-friendly graphical interface designed in collaboration with 
clinicians, supporting its integration into medical practice. The study extends 
the cohort to include healthy and Mild Cognitive Impairment subjects, aiming to 
support early diagnosis in AD pre-clinical stages. The ML system was trained on 
a large dataset of 2407 subjects from the ADNI open dataset, enhancing its 
robustness and applicability. By focusing on sex-specific features and utilizing 
longitudinal data, the system aims to improve prediction accuracy and early 
detection of AD, ultimately advancing personalized diagnostic and therapeutic 
approaches. Key findings highlight the significance of the Mini-Mental State 
Examination, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, Logical Memory - Delayed Recall, 
and educational attainment in AD diagnosis and progression, with sex-based 
disparities. Despite performance metrics based on precision, recall, and 
weighted F1-score demonstrating model efficacy, future research should address 
the limitations of relying on a single dataset.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2024.123361
PMID: 39724825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest On behalf of 
all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of 
interest.


138. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016;49(2):387-98. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150181.

Associations between Neuropsychiatric Symptoms and Cerebral Amyloid Deposition 
in Cognitively Impaired Elderly People.

Bensamoun D(1), Guignard R(2), Furst AJ(3), Derreumaux A(1), Manera V(1), 
Darcourt J(4), Benoit M(5), Robert PH(1), David R(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre Memoire de Ressources et de Recherche, Institut Claude Pompidou, EA 
CoBTek, University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hôpital de La Tour, Meyrin, GE, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Department of Neurology and 
Neurological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, USA; War Related Illness 
and Injury Study Center, VA Palo Alto, Palo Alto, USA.
(4)Nuclear Medicine Department, Antoine Lacassagne Center, Nice, France.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of Nice, France.

BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric symptoms, also known as behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), affect the majority of patients with 
dementia, and result in a greater cognitive and functional impairment.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate associations between BPSD and amyloid cerebral 
deposition as measured by 18F-Florbetapir-PET quantitative uptake in elderly 
subjects with and without cognitive impairment.
METHODS: Participants with cognitive impairment [mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
or Alzheimer's disease (AD)] and healthy controls (HC) from the ADNI cohort 
(Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative) who underwent an 18F-florbetapir PET 
scan between May 2010 and March 2014 were included. Clinical assessments 
included the Clinical Dementia Rating, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. Freesurfer software was used to extract PET 
counts based on T1-based structural ROI (frontal, cingulate, parietal, and 
temporal). Spearman's partial correlation scores between BPSD severity and 
regional amyloid uptake were calculated.
RESULTS: Data for 657 participants [age = 72.6 (7.19); MMSE = 27.4 (2.67)] were 
analyzed, including 230 HC [age = 73.1 (6.02); MMSE = 29 (1.21)], 308 MCI 
[age = 71.5 (7.44); MMSE = 28.0 (1.75)], and 119 AD subjects [age = 74.7 (8.05); 
MMSE = 23.1 (2.08)]. Considering all diagnostic groups together, positive 
significant correlations were found between anxiety and 18F-florbetapir uptake 
in the frontal (r = 0.102; p = 0.009), cingulate (r = 0.083; p = 0.034), and 
global cerebral uptake (r = 0.099; p = 0.011); between irritability and frontal 
(r = 0.089; p = 0.023), cingulate (r = 0.085; p = 0.030), parietal (r = 0.087; 
p = 0.025), and global cerebral uptake (r = 0.093; p = 0.017); in the MCI 
subgroup, between anxiety and frontal (r = 0.126; p = 0.03) and global uptake 
(r = 0.14; p = 0.013); in the AD subgroup, between irritability and parietal 
uptake (r = 0.201; p = 0.03).
CONCLUSION: Anxiety and irritability are associated with greater amyloid 
deposition in the neurodegenerative process leading to AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-150181
PMID: 26484900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Apr;35(4):808-18. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.039. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Operationalizing hippocampal volume as an enrichment biomarker for amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment trials: effect of algorithm, test-retest variability, and 
cut point on trial cost, duration, and sample size.

Yu P(1), Sun J(2), Wolz R(3), Stephenson D(4), Brewer J(5), Fox NC(6), Cole 
PE(7), Jack CR Jr(8), Hill DL(9), Schwarz AJ(10); Coalition Against Major 
Diseases and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Informatics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Informatics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Biostatistics 
Division, School of Public Health, University of Texas, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)IXICO Ltd, London, UK; Department of Computing, Imperial College, London, UK.
(4)Critical Path Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(5)Departments of Radiology and Neurosciences, University of San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, USA.
(6)Dementia Research Centre, University College Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(7)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(9)IXICO Ltd, London, UK; Dementia Research Centre, University College Institute 
of Neurology, London, UK.
(10)Tailored Therapeutics, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
Electronic address: a.schwarz@lilly.com.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of computational 
algorithm, measurement variability, and cut point on hippocampal volume 
(HCV)-based patient selection for clinical trials in mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI). We used normal control and amnestic MCI subjects from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 1 (ADNI-1) as normative reference and screening 
cohorts. We evaluated the enrichment performance of 4 widely used hippocampal 
segmentation algorithms (FreeSurfer, Hippocampus Multi-Atlas Propagation and 
Segmentation (HMAPS), Learning Embeddings Atlas Propagation (LEAP), and 
NeuroQuant) in terms of 2-year changes in Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog), and Clinical 
Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB). We modeled the implications for sample 
size, screen fail rates, and trial cost and duration. HCV based patient 
selection yielded reduced sample sizes (by ∼40%-60%) and lower trial costs (by 
∼30%-40%) across a wide range of cut points. These results provide a guide to 
the choice of HCV cut point for amnestic MCI clinical trials, allowing an 
informed tradeoff between statistical and practical considerations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.039
PMCID: PMC4201941
PMID: 24211008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Clin Neurosci. 2022 May;99:99-108. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.03.004. Epub 2022 
Mar 9.

Comparison of cortical and subcortical structural segmentation methods in 
Alzheimer's disease: A statistical approach.

Zamani J(1), Sadr A(2), Javadi AH(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, 
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: sadr@iust.ac.ir.
(3)School of Psychology, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK; School of 
Rehabilitation, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic 
address: a.h.javadi@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Automated segmentation methods are developed to help with the 
segmentation of different brain areas. However, their reliability has yet to be 
fully investigated. To have a more comprehensive understanding of the 
distribution of changes in Alzheimer's disease (AD), as well as investigating 
the reliability of different segmentation methods, in this study we compared 
volumes of cortical and subcortical brain segments, using HIPS, volBrain, CAT 
and BrainSuite automated segmentation methods between AD, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and healthy controls (HC).
METHODS: A total of 182 MRI images were taken from the minimal interval 
resonance imaging in Alzheimer's disease (MIRIAD; 22 AD and 22 HC) and the 
Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative database (ADNI; 43 AD, 50 MCI and 45 
HC) datasets. Statistical methods were used to compare different groups as well 
as the correlation between different methods.
RESULTS: The two methods of volBrain and CAT showed a strong correlation 
(p's < 0.035 Bonferroni corrected for multiple comparisons). The two methods, 
however, showed no significant correlation with BrainSuite (p's > 0.820 
Bonferroni corrected). Furthermore, BrainSuite did not follow the same trend as 
the other three methods and only HIPS, volBrain and CAT showed strong conformity 
with the past literature with strong correlation with mini mental state 
examination (MMSE) scores.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that automated segmentation methods HIPS, 
volBrain and CAT can be used in the classification of HC, AD and MCI. This is an 
indication that such methods can be used to inform researchers and clinicians of 
underlying mechanisms and progression of AD.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.03.004
PMID: 35278936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Neuroimage. 2010 May 15;51(1):488-99. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.125. 
Epub 2010 Jan 18.

Automated 3D mapping of baseline and 12-month associations between three verbal 
memory measures and hippocampal atrophy in 490 ADNI subjects.

Apostolova LG(1), Morra JH, Green AE, Hwang KS, Avedissian C, Woo E, Cummings 
JL, Toga AW, Jack CR Jr, Weiner MW, Thompson PM; Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA. lapostolova@mednet.ucla.edu

We used a previously validated automated machine learning algorithm based on 
adaptive boosting to segment the hippocampi in baseline and 12-month follow-up 
3D T1-weighted brain MRIs of 150 cognitively normal elderly (NC), 245 mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and 97 Dementia of the Alzheimer's type (DAT) ADNI 
subjects. Using the radial distance mapping technique, we examined the 
hippocampal correlates of delayed recall performance on three well-established 
verbal memory tests--ADAScog delayed recall (ADAScog-DR), the Rey Auditory 
Verbal Learning Test -DR (AVLT-DR) and Wechsler Logical Memory II-DR (LM II-DR). 
We observed no significant correlations between delayed recall performance and 
hippocampal radial distance on any of the three verbal memory measures in NC. 
All three measures were associated with hippocampal volumes and radial distance 
in the full sample and in the MCI group at baseline and at follow-up. In DAT we 
observed stronger left-sided associations between hippocampal radial distance, 
LM II-DR and ADAScog-DR both at baseline and at follow-up. The strongest linkage 
between memory performance and hippocampal atrophy in the MCI sample was 
observed with the most challenging verbal memory test-the AVLT-DR, as opposed to 
the DAT sample where the least challenging test the ADAScog-DR showed strongest 
associations with the hippocampal structure. After controlling for baseline 
hippocampal atrophy, memory performance showed regionally specific associations 
with hippocampal radial distance in predominantly CA1 but also in subicular 
distribution.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.125
PMCID: PMC2847034
PMID: 20083211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Nucl Med. 2024 Sep 3;65(9):1473-1480. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.123.267273.

Advancing Tau PET Quantification in Alzheimer Disease with Machine Learning: 
Introducing THETA, a Novel Tau Summary Measure.

Gebre RK(1), Rial AM(2)(3), Raghavan S(1), Wiste HJ(4), Heeman F(2)(3), 
Costoya-Sánchez A(5)(6)(7), Schwarz CG(1), Spychalla AJ(1), Lowe VJ(1), 
Graff-Radford J(8), Knopman DS(8), Petersen RC(4)(8), Schöll M(2)(3)(9), Murray 
ME(10), Jack CR Jr(1), Vemuri P(11); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(5)Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Nuclear Medicine Department and Molecular Imaging Group, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, Travesía da Choupana s/n, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(8)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Dementia Research Centre, Institute of Neurology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom; and.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(11)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 
vemuri.prasanthi@mayo.edu.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Oct 18:rs.3.rs-3290598. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3290598/v1.

Alzheimer disease (AD) exhibits spatially heterogeneous 3- or 4-repeat tau 
deposition across participants. Our overall goal was to develop an automated 
method to quantify the heterogeneous burden of tau deposition into a single 
number that would be clinically useful. Methods: We used tau PET scans from 3 
independent cohorts: the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging and Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Center (Mayo, n = 1,290), the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI, n = 831), and the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies 
(OASIS-3, n = 430). A machine learning binary classification model was trained 
on Mayo data and validated on ADNI and OASIS-3 with the goal of predicting 
visual tau positivity (as determined by 3 raters following Food and Drug 
Administration criteria for 18F-flortaucipir). The machine learning model used 
region-specific SUV ratios scaled to cerebellar crus uptake. We estimated 
feature contributions based on an artificial intelligence-explainable method 
(Shapley additive explanations) and formulated a global tau summary measure, Tau 
Heterogeneity Evaluation in Alzheimer's Disease (THETA) score, using SUV ratios 
and Shapley additive explanations for each participant. We compared the 
performance of THETA with that of commonly used meta-regions of interest (ROIs) 
using the Mini-Mental State Examination, the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of 
Boxes, clinical diagnosis, and histopathologic staging. Results: The model 
achieved a balanced accuracy of 95% on the Mayo test set and at least 87% on the 
validation sets. It classified tau-positive and -negative participants with an 
AUC of 1.00, 0.96, and 0.94 on the Mayo, ADNI, and OASIS-3 cohorts, 
respectively. Across all cohorts, THETA showed a better correlation with the 
Mini-Mental State Examination and the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes (ρ ≥ 
0.45, P < 0.05) than did meta-ROIs (ρ < 0.44, P < 0.05) and discriminated 
between participants who were cognitively unimpaired and those who had mild 
cognitive impairment with an effect size of 10.09, compared with an effect size 
of 3.08 for meta-ROIs. Conclusion: Our proposed approach identifies positive tau 
PET scans and provides a quantitative summary measure, THETA, that effectively 
captures heterogeneous tau deposition observed in AD. The application of THETA 
for quantifying tau PET in AD exhibits great potential.

© 2024 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.123.267273
PMCID: PMC11372256
PMID: 39054278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2014;17(Pt 2):162-9. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-10470-6_21.

Multi-modality canonical feature selection for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

Zhu X, Suk HI, Shen D.

Feature selection has been commonly regarded as an effective method to lessen 
the problem of high dimension and low sample size in medical image analysis. In 
this paper, we propose a novel multimodality canonical feature selection method. 
Unlike the conventional sparse Multi-Task Learning (MTL) based feature selection 
method that mostly considered only the relationship between target response 
variables, we further consider the correlations between features of different 
modalities by projecting them into a canonical space determined by canonical 
correlation analysis. We call the projections as canonical representations. By 
setting the canonical representations as regressors in a sparse least square 
regression framework and by further penalizing the objective function with a new 
canonical regularizer on the weight coefficient matrix, we formulate a 
multi-modality canonical feature selection method. With the help of the 
canonical information of canonical representations and also a canonical 
regularizer, the proposed method selects canonical-cross-modality features that 
are useful for the tasks of clinical scores regression and multi-class disease 
identification. In our experiments on the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) dataset, we combine Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and 
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) images to jointly predict clinical scores of 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog) and 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and also identify multiclass disease status 
for Alzheimer's disease diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-10470-6_21
PMCID: PMC4465097
PMID: 25485375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Brain Struct Funct. 2022 Apr;227(3):913-924. doi: 10.1007/s00429-021-02429-y. 
Epub 2022 Jan 14.

The impact of Alzheimer's disease susceptibility loci on lateral ventricular 
surface morphology in older adults.

Li S(1), An N(1), Chen N(1), Wang Y(1), Yang L(1), Wang Y(2), Yao Z(3), Hu 
B(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing, School of Information 
Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, No. 222 South Tianshui Road, 
Lanzhou, 730000, Gansu Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(3)Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing, School of Information 
Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, No. 222 South Tianshui Road, 
Lanzhou, 730000, Gansu Province, People's Republic of China. yaozj@lzu.edu.cn.
(4)Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of Wearable Computing, School of Information 
Science and Engineering, Lanzhou University, No. 222 South Tianshui Road, 
Lanzhou, 730000, Gansu Province, People's Republic of China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.
(5)CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
ShangHai, China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.
(6)Joint Research Center for Cognitive Neurosensor Technology of Lanzhou 
University and Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
LanZhou, China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.
(7)Engineering Research Center of Open Source Software and Real-Time System, 
Ministry of Education, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China. bh@lzu.edu.cn.

The enlargement of ventricular volume is a general trend in the elderly, 
especially in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Multiple susceptibility 
loci have been reported to have an increased risk for AD and the morphology of 
brain structures are affected by the variations in the risk loci. Therefore, we 
hypothesized that genes contributed significantly to the ventricular surface, 
and the changes of ventricular surface were associated with the impairment of 
cognitive functions. After the quality controls (QC) and genotyping, a lateral 
ventricular segmentation method was employed to obtain the surface features of 
lateral ventricle. We evaluated the influence of 18 selected AD susceptibility 
loci on both volume and surface morphology across 410 subjects from Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Correlations were conducted between 
radial distance (RD) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) subscales. Only 
the C allele at the rs744373 loci in BIN1 gene significantly accelerated the 
atrophy of lateral ventricle, including the anterior horn, body, and temporal 
horn of left lateral ventricle. No significant effect on lateral ventricle was 
found at other loci. Our results revealed that most regions of the bilateral 
ventricular surface were significantly negatively correlated with cognitive 
scores, particularly in delayed recall. Besides, small areas of surface were 
negatively correlated with language, orientation, and visuospatial scores. 
Together, our results indicated that the genetic variation affected the 
localized areas of lateral ventricular surface, and supported that lateral 
ventricle was an important brain structure associated with cognition in the 
elderly.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-021-02429-y
PMID: 35028746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2025 Feb;129:105659. doi: 10.1016/j.archger.2024.105659. 
Epub 2024 Oct 13.

Longitudinal trajectories of general cognitive and daily functions in 
data-driven subtypes of MCI: A longitudinal cohort analysis of older adults.

Long X(1), Yuan M(1), Zhang Z(1), Fang Y(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Electronic 
address: fangya@xmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: To derive data-driven subtypes of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
and characterize the complicated changes of general cognitive and daily 
functions over time in MCI subtypes.
METHODS: A total of 813 subjects diagnosed as MCI at baseline from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were included. Data-driven 
MCI subtypes were derived from group-based multi-trajectory modeling (GBMTM) 
analyses using longitudinal measurement scores in the cognitive domains of 
visuospatial function, language, and executive function. General cognitive and 
daily functions were measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
the Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), respectively, whose longitudinal 
trajectory changes were depicted by Linear mixed models.
RESULTS: Three MCI subtypes were derived, which were defined as "Cognitive 
decline group", "Mild cognitive decline group" and "No cognitive decline group". 
The "Mild cognitive decline group" had the highest percentage in the sample 
(46.2 %), followed by the "No cognitive decline group" (35.2 %). Patients in the 
"Cognitive decline group" had the highest mean age (74.69 years) at baseline, 
the highest APOE ε4 carriers (63.2 %), and the greatest dementia conversion rate 
(77.0 %). The changes in MMSE and FAQ score trajectories were fastest in the 
"Cognitive decline group" in the first 36 months and most slowly in the "No 
cognitive decline group".
CONCLUSION: MCI individuals could be subdivided into more fine-grained cognitive 
subtypes, and identifying these distinct MCI subtypes and their different 
trajectories of cognitive decline may have important prognostic value for 
improving clinical course prediction.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2024.105659
PMID: 39454276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


146. Neurology. 2017 Nov 21;89(21):2176-2186. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004670. Epub 
2017 Oct 25.

Alzheimer disease brain atrophy subtypes are associated with cognition and rate 
of decline.

Risacher SL(1), Anderson WH(1), Charil A(1), Castelluccio PF(1), Shcherbinin 
S(1), Saykin AJ(2), Schwarz AJ(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, Trojanowki 
JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Morris J, Shaw LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, 
Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman 
D, Mesulam MM, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, 
Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian 
AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox 
N, Thompson P, Schuff N, DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, 
Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, 
Mathis C, Landau S, Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw 
LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, 
Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Thal L, National 
NB, Albert M, Frank R, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, 
Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, 
Vanderswag H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers 
CS, Knopman D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Rountree S, 
Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, Creech ML, 
Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, 
Geldmacher D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Love MN, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Shah RC, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Galvin JE, Cerbone B, Michel CA, Pogorelec DM, 
Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy MP, Petrella JR, 
Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Clark CM, 
Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, 
Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand 
C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, 
Woo E, Silverman DHS, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Kendall 
T, Johnson H, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, Brosch JR, Herring S, Hunt C, van 
Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, Bergman H, Hosein C, Black 
S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Robin Hsiung GY, Feldman H, Mudge B, Assaly M, 
Finger E, Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, 
Sadowsky C, Villena T, Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh 
MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash 
A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, 
Fatica P, Fletcher E, Maillard P, Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, 
Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda 
A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Burke A, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote 
H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Adeli A, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, 
Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, 
Sink KM, Gordineer L, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, 
Tremont G, Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, 
Mintzer J, Spicer K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, 
Kertesz A, Drost D, Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Boles Ponto LL, 
Shim H, Smith KE, Relkin N, Chaing G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher 
K.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin, 
A.J. Schwarz), Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin), and 
Department of Biostatistics (P.F.C.), Indiana University School of Medicine; Eli 
Lilly and Company (W.H.A., A.C., S.S., A.J. Schwarz), Indianapolis; and 
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences (A.J. Schwarz), Indiana 
University, Bloomington.
(2)From the Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin, 
A.J. Schwarz), Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center (S.L.R., A.J. Saykin), and 
Department of Biostatistics (P.F.C.), Indiana University School of Medicine; Eli 
Lilly and Company (W.H.A., A.C., S.S., A.J. Schwarz), Indianapolis; and 
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences (A.J. Schwarz), Indiana 
University, Bloomington. asaykin@iupui.edu a.schwarz@lilly.com.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that cortical and hippocampal volumes, 
measured in vivo from volumetric MRI (vMRI) scans, could be used to identify 
variant subtypes of Alzheimer disease (AD) and to prospectively predict the rate 
of clinical decline.
METHODS: Amyloid-positive participants with AD from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 1 and ADNI2 with baseline MRI scans (n = 229) and 
2-year clinical follow-up (n = 100) were included. AD subtypes (hippocampal 
sparing [HpSpMRI], limbic predominant [LPMRI], typical AD [tADMRI]) were defined 
according to an algorithm analogous to one recently proposed for tau 
neuropathology. Relationships between baseline hippocampal volume to cortical 
volume ratio (HV:CTV) and clinical variables were examined by both continuous 
regression and categorical models.
RESULTS: When participants were divided categorically, the HpSpMRI group showed 
significantly more AD-like hypometabolism on 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-PET (p < 
0.05) and poorer baseline executive function (p < 0.001). Other baseline 
clinical measures did not differ across the 3 groups. Participants with HpSpMRI 
also showed faster subsequent clinical decline than participants with LPMRI on 
the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale, 13-Item Subscale (ADAS-Cog13), 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and Functional Assessment Questionnaire 
(all p < 0.05) and tADMRI on the MMSE and Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes 
(CDR-SB) (both p < 0.05). Finally, a larger HV:CTV was associated with poorer 
baseline executive function and a faster slope of decline in CDR-SB, MMSE, and 
ADAS-Cog13 score (p < 0.05). These associations were driven mostly by the amount 
of cortical rather than hippocampal atrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: AD subtypes with phenotypes consistent with those observed with tau 
neuropathology can be identified in vivo with vMRI. An increased HV:CTV ratio 
was predictive of faster clinical decline in participants with AD who were 
clinically indistinguishable at baseline except for a greater dysexecutive 
presentation.

© 2017 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004670
PMCID: PMC5696639
PMID: 29070667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Affect Disord. 2020 Sep 1;274:262-268. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.05.097. Epub 
2020 May 23.

Associations of Subsyndromal Symptomatic Depression with Cognitive Decline and 
Brain Atrophy in Elderly Individuals without Dementia: A Longitudinal Study.

Zhang Z(1), Wei F(2), Shen XN(3), Ma YH(1), Chen KL(3), Dong Q(3), Tan L(4), Yu 
JT(5); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Psychological Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China. Electronic address: dr.tanlan@163.com.
(5)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: 
jintai_yu@fudan.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Subsyndromal symptomatic depression (SSD) is prevalent in older 
adults. However, it remains unclear whether there are effects of SSD on brain 
aging outcomes (cognition and brain structures), especially in the presence of 
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) pathology.
METHODS: A total of 1,188 adults without dementia were recruited from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Participants with 
SSD were measured using the 15-item Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15). In 
multivariable models, the cross-sectional and longitudinal associations of SSD 
with brain aging outcomes were explored. We further evaluated whether baseline 
amyloid-β (Aβ) load modifies the relations between SSD and brain aging outcomes.
RESULTS: SSD at baseline was associated with significantly longitudinal decline 
in cognition and displayed significantly accelerated atrophy in hippocampus 
(β = -29.53, p = 0.001) and middle temporal gyrus (β = - 77.82, p = 0.006) among 
all participants and Aβ-Positive individuals. SSD interacted with baseline Aβ 
load in predicting longitudinal decline in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
(β = - 0.327, p = 0.023), episodic memory (β = -0.065, p = 0.004) and increase 
in Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale Cognition 13-item scale (ADAS-cog13) 
(β = 0.754, p = 0.026).
LIMITATIONS: Our study didn't look at AD diagnosis but Aβ status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggested that older people without dementia with both 
SSD and a high level of Aβ load may have higher risk of cognitive deterioration 
and brain atrophy. Therapeutic mitigation of depressive symptoms, especially in 
those with abnormal Aβ levels, may help delay progressive decline in cognition.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.05.097
PMID: 32469814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.


148. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;79(3):1133-1142. doi: 10.3233/JAD-201122.

Financial Capacity and Regional Cerebral Tau in Cognitively Normal Older Adults, 
Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer's Disease Dementia.

Gonzalez C(1)(2)(3), Tommasi NS(1)(2), Briggs D(1)(2)(3), Properzi MJ(3), 
Amariglio RE(1)(2)(3), Marshall GA(1)(2)(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Financial capacity is often one of the first instrumental activities 
of daily living to be affected in cognitively normal (CN) older adults who later 
progress to amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) dementia.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate the association 
between financial capacity and regional cerebral tau.
METHODS: Cross-sectional financial capacity was assessed using the Financial 
Capacity Instrument -Short Form (FCI-SF) in 410 CN, 199 MCI, and 61 AD dementia 
participants who underwent flortaucipir tau positron emission tomography from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Linear regression models 
with backward elimination were used with FCI-SF total score as the dependent 
variable and regional tau and tau-amyloid interaction as predictors of interest 
in separate analyses. Education, age, sex, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
Total Learning, and Trail Making Test B were used as covariates.
RESULTS: Significant associations were found between FCI-SF and tau regions 
(entorhinal: p < 0.001; inferior temporal: p < 0.001; dorsolateral prefrontal: 
p = 0.01; posterior cingulate: p = 0.03; precuneus: p < 0.001; and supramarginal 
gyrus: p = 0.005) across all participants. For the tau-amyloid interaction, 
significant associations were found in four regions (amyloid and dorsolateral 
prefrontal tau interaction: p = 0.005; amyloid and posterior cingulate tau 
interaction: p = 0.005; amyloid and precuneus tau interaction: p < 0.001; and 
amyloid and supramarginal tau interaction: p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Greater regional tau burden was modestly associated with financial 
capacity impairment in early-stage AD. Extending this work with longitudinal 
analyses will further illustrate the utility of such assessments in detecting 
clinically meaningful decline, which may aid clinical trials of early-stage AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-201122
PMCID: PMC7870560
PMID: 33386806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. BMC Neurol. 2024 Feb 27;24(1):78. doi: 10.1186/s12883-024-03577-4.

The SNP rs6859 in NECTIN2 gene is associated with underlying heterogeneous 
trajectories of cognitive changes in older adults.

Rajendrakumar AL(1), Arbeev KG(2), Bagley O(1), Yashin AI(1), Ukraintseva S(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Biodemography of Aging Research Unit, Social Science Research Institute, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27708-0408, USA.
(2)Biodemography of Aging Research Unit, Social Science Research Institute, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27708-0408, USA. ka29@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Functional decline associated with dementia, including in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), is not uniform across individuals, and respective 
heterogeneity is not yet fully explained. Such heterogeneity may in part be 
related to genetic variability among individuals. In this study, we investigated 
whether the SNP rs6859 in nectin cell adhesion molecule 2 (NECTIN2) gene (a 
major risk factor for AD) influences trajectories of cognitive decline in older 
participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed records on 1310 participants from the ADNI 
database for the multivariate analysis. We used longitudinal measures of 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores in participants, who were 
cognitively normal, or having AD, or other cognitive deficits to investigate the 
trajectories of cognitive changes. Multiple linear regression, linear mixed 
models and latent class analyses were conducted to investigate the association 
of the SNP rs6859 with MMSE.
RESULTS: The regression coefficient per one allele dose of the SNP rs6859 was 
independently associated with MMSE in both cross-sectional (-2.23, p < 0.01) and 
linear mixed models (-2.26, p < 0.01) analyses. The latent class model with 
three distinct subgroups (class 1: stable and gradual decline, class 2: 
intermediate and late decline, and class 3: lowest and irregular) performed best 
in the posterior classification, 42.67% (n = 559), 21.45% (n = 281), 35.88% 
(n = 470) were classified as class 1, class 2, and class 3. In the heterogeneous 
linear mixed model, the regression coefficient per one allele dose of rs6859 - A 
risk allele was significantly associated with MMSE class 1 and class 2 
memberships and related decline; Class 1 (-2.28, 95% CI: -4.05, -0.50, 
p < 0.05), Class 2 (-5.56, 95% CI: -9.61, -1.51, p < 0.01) and Class 3 (-0.37, 
95% CI: -1.62, 0.87, p = 0.55).
CONCLUSIONS: This study found statistical evidence supporting the classification 
of three latent subclass groups representing complex MMSE trajectories in the 
ADNI cohort. The SNP rs6859 can be suggested as a candidate genetic predictor of 
variation in modeling MMSE trajectory, as well as for identifying latent classes 
with higher baseline MMSE. Functional studies may help further elucidate this 
relationship.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-024-03577-4
PMCID: PMC10898142
PMID: 38408961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


150. Neurology. 2021 Sep 20;97(12):e1243-e1252. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000012512.

Impact of C-Reactive Protein on Cognition and Alzheimer Disease Biomarkers in 
Homozygous APOE ɛ4 Carriers.

Tao Q(1), Alvin Ang TF(1), Akhter-Khan SC(1), Itchapurapu IS(1), Killiany R(1), 
Zhang X(1), Budson AE(1), Turk KW(1), Goldstein L(1), Mez J(1), Alosco ML(1), 
Qiu WQ(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (Q.T., 
I.S.I., W.Q.Q.), Framingham Heart Study (Q.T., T.F.A.A.), Department of Anatomy 
and Neurobiology (T.F.A.A., R.K.), Slone Epidemiology Center (T.F.A.A.), 
Department of Medicine (X.Z.), Department of Neurology (A.E.B., K.W.T., J.M., 
M.L.A.), Department of Psychiatry (W.Q.Q.), and Alzheimer's Disease and CTE 
Centers (A.E.B., K.W.T., L.G., J.M., M.L.A., W.Q.Q.), Boston University School 
of Medicine, MA; Department of Psychology (S.C.A.-K.), Humboldt University of 
Berlin, Germany; Department of Health Service and Population Research 
(S.C.A.-K.), King's College London, UK; and Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare 
System (A.E.B., K.W.T.), MA.
(2)From the Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (Q.T., 
I.S.I., W.Q.Q.), Framingham Heart Study (Q.T., T.F.A.A.), Department of Anatomy 
and Neurobiology (T.F.A.A., R.K.), Slone Epidemiology Center (T.F.A.A.), 
Department of Medicine (X.Z.), Department of Neurology (A.E.B., K.W.T., J.M., 
M.L.A.), Department of Psychiatry (W.Q.Q.), and Alzheimer's Disease and CTE 
Centers (A.E.B., K.W.T., L.G., J.M., M.L.A., W.Q.Q.), Boston University School 
of Medicine, MA; Department of Psychology (S.C.A.-K.), Humboldt University of 
Berlin, Germany; Department of Health Service and Population Research 
(S.C.A.-K.), King's College London, UK; and Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare 
System (A.E.B., K.W.T.), MA. wqiu67@bu.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2022 Nov 15;99(20):919. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201509.
    Neurology. 2022 Nov 15;99(20):918-919. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000201508.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Previous research has shown that elevated blood 
C-reactive protein (CRP) is associated with increased Alzheimer disease (AD) 
risk only in APOE ε4 allele carriers; the objective of this study was to examine 
the interactive effects of plasma CRP and APOE genotype on cognition and AD 
biomarkers.
METHODS: Data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study 
were analyzed, including APOE genotype; plasma CRP concentrations; diagnostic 
status (i.e., mild cognitive impairment and dementia due to AD); Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and Clinical Dementia Rating Dementia Staging 
Instrument scores; CSF concentrations of β-amyloid peptide (Aβ42), total tau 
(t-Tau) and phosphorylated tau (p-Tau); and amyloid (AV45) PET imaging. 
Multivariable regression analyses tested the associations between plasma CRP and 
APOE on cognitive and biomarker outcomes.
RESULTS: Among 566 ADNI participants, 274 (48.4%) had no, 222 (39.2%) had 1, and 
70 (12.4%) had 2 APOE ε4 alleles. Among only participants who had 2 APOE ε4 
alleles, elevated CRP was associated with lower MMSE score at baseline (β [95% 
confidence interval] -0.52 [-1.01, -0.12]) and 12-month follow-up (β -1.09 
[-1.88, -0.17]) after adjustment for sex, age, and education. The interaction of 
2 APOE ε4 alleles and elevated plasma CRP was associated with increased CSF 
levels of t-Tau (β = 11.21, SE 3.37, p < 0.001) and p-Tau (β = +2.74, SE 1.14, p 
< 0.01). Among those who had no APOE ε4 alleles, elevated CRP was associated 
with decreased CSF t-Tau and p-Tau. These effects were stronger at the 12-month 
follow-up.
DISCUSSION: CRP released during peripheral inflammation could be a mediator in 
APOE ε4-related AD neurodegeneration and serve as a drug target for AD.

© 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000012512
PMCID: PMC8480484
PMID: 34266923


151. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 10;14(1):27472. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-78712-9.

Exploring the relationship among Alzheimer's disease, aging and cognitive scores 
through neuroimaging-based approach.

Sun J(1), Han JJ(2), Chen W(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu, 
273165, People's Republic of China.
(2)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Center for Quantitative Biology (CQB), Peking 
University, Beijing, 100871, People's Republic of China. jackie.han@pku.edu.cn.
(3)School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu, 
273165, People's Republic of China. chenweiyang@qfnu.edu.cn.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, with the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) serving 
significant roles in monitoring its progression. We hypothesize that while 
cognitive assessment scores can detect AD-related brain changes, the targeted 
brain regions may differ. Additionally, given AD's strong association with 
aging, we propose that specific brain regions are influenced by both AD 
pathology and aging, exhibiting strong correlations with both. To test these 
hypotheses, we developed a 3D convolutional network with a mixed-attention 
mechanism to recognize AD subjects from structural magnetic resonance imaging 
(sMRI) data and utilize 3D convolutional methods to pinpoint brain regions 
significantly correlated with the AD, MMSE, CDR and age. All models were trained 
and internally validated on 417 samples from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), and the classification model was externally 
validated on 382 samples from the Australian Imaging and Lifestyle flagship 
(AIBL). This approach provided robust support for using MMSE and CDR in 
assessing AD progression and visually illustrated the relationship between aging 
and AD. The analysis revealed correlations among the four identification tasks 
(AD, MMSE, CDR and age) and highlighted asymmetric brain lesions in both AD and 
aging. Notably, we found that AD can accelerate aging to some extent, and a 
significant correlation exists between the rate of aging and cognitive 
assessment scores. This offers new insights into the relationship between AD and 
aging.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-78712-9
PMCID: PMC11551169
PMID: 39523370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors 
declare no competing interests.


152. Alzheimers Dement. 2020 Sep;16(9):1234-1247. doi: 10.1002/alz.12110. Epub 2020 
Jul 27.

Circulating ethanolamine plasmalogen indices in Alzheimer's disease: Relation to 
diagnosis, cognition, and CSF tau.

Kling MA(1)(2), Goodenowe DB(3), Senanayake V(3), MahmoudianDehkordi S(4), 
Arnold M(4)(5), Massaro TJ(6), Baillie R(7), Han X(8), Leung YY(9), Saykin 
AJ(10), Nho K(10), Kueider-Paisley A(4), Tenenbaum JD(11), Wang LS(9), Shaw 
LM(9), Trojanowski JQ(9), Kaddurah-Daouk RF(4)(12)(13); Alzheimer's Disease 
Metabolomics Consortium (ADMC) and the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Behavioral Health Service, Crescenz VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Prodrome Sciences Inc., Temecula, California, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina, USA.
(5)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(6)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.
(7)Rosa & Co LLC, San Carlos, California, USA.
(8)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(10)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences and the Indiana Alzheimer 
Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, 
USA.
(11)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, 
North Carolina, USA.
(12)Duke Institute of Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Altered lipid metabolism is implicated in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), but the mechanisms remain obscure. Aging-related declines in circulating 
plasmalogens containing omega-3 fatty acids may increase AD risk by reducing 
plasmalogen availability.
METHODS: We measured four ethanolamine plasmalogens (PlsEtns) and four closely 
related phosphatidylethanolamines (PtdEtns) from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; n = 1547 serum) and University of Pennsylvania 
(UPenn; n = 112 plasma) cohorts, and derived indices reflecting PlsEtn and 
PtdEtn metabolism: PL-PX (PlsEtns), PL/PE (PlsEtn/PtdEtn ratios), and PBV 
(plasmalogen biosynthesis value; a composite index). We tested associations with 
baseline diagnosis, cognition, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers.
RESULTS: Results revealed statistically significant negative relationships in 
ADNI between AD versus CN with PL-PX (P = 0.007) and PBV (P = 0.005), late mild 
cognitive impairment (LMCI) versus cognitively normal (CN) with PL-PX (P = 2.89 
× 10-5 ) and PBV (P = 1.99 × 10-4 ), and AD versus LMCI with PL/PE (P = 1.85 × 
10-4 ). In the UPenn cohort, AD versus CN diagnosis associated negatively with 
PL/PE (P = 0.0191) and PBV (P = 0.0296). In ADNI, cognition was negatively 
associated with plasmalogen indices, including Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale 13-item cognitive subscale (ADAS-Cog13; PL-PX: P = 3.24 × 10-6 ; PBV: P = 
6.92 × 10-5 ) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; PL-PX: P = 1.28 × 10-9 ; 
PBV: P = 6.50 × 10-9 ). In the UPenn cohort, there was a trend toward a similar 
relationship of MMSE with PL/PE (P = 0.0949). In ADNI, CSF total-tau was 
negatively associated with PL-PX (P = 5.55 × 10-6 ) and PBV (P = 7.77 × 10-6 ). 
Additionally, CSF t-tau/Aβ1-42 ratio was negatively associated with these same 
indices (PL-PX, P = 2.73 × 10-6 ; PBV, P = 4.39 × 10-6 ). In the UPenn cohort, 
PL/PE was negatively associated with CSF total-tau (P = 0.031) and t-tau/Aβ1-42 
(P = 0.021). CSF Aβ1-42 was not significantly associated with any of these 
indices in either cohort.
DISCUSSION: These data extend previous studies by showing an association of 
decreased plasmalogen indices with AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
cognition, and CSF tau. Future studies are needed to better define mechanistic 
relationships, and to test the effects of interventions designed to replete 
serum plasmalogens.

© 2020 the Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12110
PMCID: PMC8152932
PMID: 32715599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Front Neurosci. 2024 Aug 7;18:1440653. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1440653. 
eCollection 2024.

Exploring white matter microstructural alterations in mild cognitive impairment: 
a multimodal diffusion MRI investigation utilizing diffusion kurtosis and 
free-water imaging.

Nelson MR(1)(2), Keeling EG(1)(2), Stokes AM(1), Bergamino M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroimaging Research, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, 
AZ, United States.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage from normal 
aging to dementia, characterized by noticeable changes in cognitive function 
that do not significantly impact daily life. Diffusion MRI (dMRI) plays a 
crucial role in understanding MCI by assessing white matter integrity and 
revealing early signs of axonal degeneration and myelin breakdown before 
cognitive symptoms appear.
METHODS: This study utilized the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database to compare white matter microstructure in individuals with MCI 
to cognitively normal (CN) individuals, employing advanced dMRI techniques such 
as diffusion kurtosis imaging (DKI), mean signal diffusion kurtosis imaging 
(MSDKI), and free water imaging (FWI).
RESULTS: Analyzing data from 55 CN subjects and 46 individuals with MCI, this 
study found significant differences in white matter integrity, particularly in 
free water levels and kurtosis values, suggesting neuroinflammatory responses 
and microstructural integrity disruption in MCI. Moreover, negative correlations 
between Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores and free water levels in the 
brain within the MCI group point to the potential of these measures as early 
biomarkers for cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, this study demonstrates how a multimodal advanced 
diffusion imaging approach can uncover early microstructural changes in MCI, 
offering insights into the neurobiological mechanisms behind cognitive decline.

Copyright © 2024 Nelson, Keeling, Stokes and Bergamino.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2024.1440653
PMCID: PMC11335656
PMID: 39170682

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


154. Neuroimage. 2021 Feb 15;227:117646. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117646. Epub 
2020 Dec 16.

Analyzing the effect of APOE on Alzheimer's disease progression using an 
event-based model for stratified populations.

Venkatraghavan V(1), Klein S(2), Fani L(3), Ham LS(2), Vrooman H(2), Ikram 
MK(4), Niessen WJ(5), Bron EE(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology & Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: v.venkatraghavan@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology & Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands; Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Biomedical Imaging Group Rotterdam, Department of Radiology & Nuclear 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the Netherlands; 
Quantitative Imaging Group, Dept. of Imaging Physics, Faculty of Applied 
Sciences, Delft University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia and is 
phenotypically heterogeneous. APOE is a triallelic gene which correlates with 
phenotypic heterogeneity in AD. In this work, we determined the effect of APOE 
alleles on the disease progression timeline of AD using a discriminative 
event-based model (DEBM). Since DEBM is a data-driven model, stratification into 
smaller disease subgroups would lead to more inaccurate models as compared to 
fitting the model on the entire dataset. Hence our secondary aim is to propose 
and evaluate novel approaches in which we split the different steps of DEBM into 
group-aspecific and group-specific parts, where the entire dataset is used to 
train the group-aspecific parts and only the data from a specific group is used 
to train the group-specific parts of the DEBM. We performed simulation 
experiments to benchmark the accuracy of the proposed approaches and to select 
the optimal approach. Subsequently, the chosen approach was applied to the 
baseline data of 417 cognitively normal, 235 mild cognitively impaired who 
convert to AD within 3 years, and 342 AD patients from the Alzheimers Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset to gain new insights into the effect of 
APOE carriership on the disease progression timeline of AD. In the ε4 carrier 
group, the model predicted with high confidence that CSF Amyloidβ42 and the 
cognitive score of Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS) are early 
biomarkers. Hippocampus was the earliest volumetric biomarker to become 
abnormal, closely followed by the CSF Phosphorylated Tau181 (PTAU) biomarker. In 
the homozygous ε3 carrier group, the model predicted a similar ordering among 
CSF biomarkers. However, the volume of the fusiform gyrus was identified as one 
of the earliest volumetric biomarker. While the findings in the ε4 carrier and 
the homozygous ε3 carrier groups fit the current understanding of progression of 
AD, the finding in the ε2 carrier group did not. The model predicted, with 
relatively low confidence, CSF Neurogranin as one of the earliest biomarkers 
along with cognitive score of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Amyloid β42 
was found to become abnormal after PTAU. The presented models could aid 
understanding of the disease, and in selecting homogeneous group of 
presymptomatic subjects at-risk of developing symptoms for clinical trials.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117646
PMID: 33338617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Psychol Aging. 2013 Mar;28(1):191-201. doi: 10.1037/a0031063.

Subgroup of ADNI normal controls characterized by atrophy and cognitive decline 
associated with vascular damage.

Nettiksimmons J(1), Beckett L, Schwarz C, Carmichael O, Fletcher E, Decarli C.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Translational Science Center, University of California, Davis, 
School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. janettik@ucdavis.edu

Previous work examining Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
normal controls using cluster analysis identified a subgroup characterized by 
substantial brain atrophy and white matter hyperintensities (WMH). We 
hypothesized that these effects could be related to vascular damage. Fifty-three 
individuals in the suspected vascular cluster (Normal 2) were compared with 31 
individuals from the cluster characterized as healthy/typical (Normal 1) on a 
variety of outcomes, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, vascular risk factors and outcomes, 
cognitive trajectory, and medications for vascular conditions. Normal 2 was 
significantly older but did not differ on ApoE4+ prevalence. Normal 2 differed 
significantly from Normal 1 on all MRI measures but not on Amyloid-Beta1-42 or 
total tau protein. Normal 2 had significantly higher body mass index (BMI), 
Hachinksi score, and creatinine levels, and took significantly more medications 
for vascular conditions. Normal 2 had marginally significantly higher 
triglycerides and blood glucose. Normal 2 had a worse cognitive trajectory on 
the Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) 30-min delay test and the 
Functional Activity Questionnaire (FAQ). Cerebral atrophy associated with 
multiple vascular risks is common among cognitively normal individuals, forming 
a distinct subgroup with significantly increased cognitive decline. Further 
studies are needed to determine the clinical impact of these findings.

DOI: 10.1037/a0031063
PMCID: PMC3751169
PMID: 23527743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Front Neurol. 2019 Sep 13;10:976. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00976. eCollection 
2019.

Associating Cognition With Amyloid Status Using Partially Ordered Set Analysis.

Carr SJA(1)(2), Jaeger J(3)(4), Bian S(5), He P(5), Maserejian N(5), Wang W(5), 
Maruff P(6)(7), Enayetallah A(5), Wang Y(8), Chen Z(1), Lerner A(1)(9), Tatsuoka 
C(1)(9)(10); Australian Imaging Biomarkers and Lifestyle Flagship Study of 
Ageing.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
United States.
(2)Neuroimaging Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)CognitionMetrics, LLC, Wilmington, DE, United States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States.
(5)Biogen, Cambridge, MA, United States.
(6)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(7)CogState Ltd., Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(8)Department of Radiology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 
United States.
(9)Neurological Institute, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, 
Beachwood, OH, United States.
(10)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States.

Background: The presence of brain amyloid-beta positivity is associated with 
cognitive impairment and dementia, but whether there are specific aspects of 
cognition that are most linked to amyloid-beta is unclear. Analysis of 
neuropsychological test data presents challenges since a single test often 
requires drawing upon multiple cognitive functions to perform well. It can thus 
be imprecise to link performance on a given test to a specific cognitive 
function. Our objective was to provide insight into how cognitive functions are 
associated with brain amyloid-beta positivity among samples consisting of 
cognitively normal and mild cognitively impaired (MCI) subjects, by using 
partially ordered set models (POSETs). Methods: We used POSET classification 
models of neuropsychological test data to classify samples to detailed cognitive 
profiles using ADNI2 and AIBL data. We considered 3 gradations of episodic 
memory, cognitive flexibility, verbal fluency, attention and perceptual motor 
speed, and performed group comparisons of cognitive functioning stratified by 
amyloid positivity (yes/no) and age (<70, 70-80, 81-90 years). We also employed 
random forest methods stratified by age to assess the effectiveness of cognitive 
testing in predicting amyloid positivity, in addition to demographic variables, 
and APOE4 allele count. Results: In ADNI2, differences in episodic memory and 
attention by amyloid were found for <70, and 70-80 years groups. In AIBL, 
episodic memory differences were found in the 70-80 years age group. In both 
studies, no cognitive differences were found in the 81-90 years group. The 
random forest analysis indicates that variable importance in classification 
depends on age. Cognitive testing that targets an intermediate level of episodic 
memory and delayed recall, in addition to APOE4 allele count, are the most 
important variables in both studies. Conclusions: In the ADNI2 and AIBL samples, 
the associations between specific cognitive abilities and brain amyloid-beta 
positivity depended on age, but in general episodic memory was most consistently 
predictive of brain amyloid-beta positivity. Random forest methods and OOB error 
rates establish the feasibility of predicting the presence of brain beta-amyloid 
using cognitive testing, APOE4 genotyping and demographic variables.

Copyright © 2019 Carr, Jaeger, Bian, He, Maserejian, Wang, Maruff, Enayetallah, 
Wang, Chen, Lerner and Tatsuoka.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00976
PMCID: PMC6753225
PMID: 31572291


157. J Alzheimers Dis. 2024;101(3):923-936. doi: 10.3233/JAD-240532.

A Novel Score to Predict Individual Risk for Future Alzheimer's Disease: A 
Longitudinal Study of the ADNI Cohort.

Guo H(1), Sun S(1), Yang Y(2), Ma R(3), Wang C(1), Zheng S(1), Wang X(1), Li 
G(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Metabolomics Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of General Medicine, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Identifying high-risk individuals with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) who are likely to progress to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is crucial for 
early intervention.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to develop and validate a novel clinical score for 
personalized estimation of MCI-to-AD conversion.
METHODS: The data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
study were analyzed. Two-thirds of the MCI patients were randomly assigned to a 
training cohort (n = 478), and the remaining one-third formed the validation 
cohort (n = 239). Multivariable logistic regression was performed to identify 
factors associated with MCI-to-AD progression within 4 years. A prediction score 
was developed based on the regression coefficients derived from the logistic 
model and tested in the validation cohort.
RESULTS: A lipidomics-signature was obtained that showed a significant 
association with disease progression. The MCI conversion scoring system (ranged 
from 0 to 14 points), consisting of the lipidomics-signature and five other 
significant variables (Apolipoprotein ɛ4, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
immediate and delayed recall, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale delayed 
recall test, Functional Activities Questionnaire, and cortical thickness of the 
AD signature), was constructed. Higher conversion scores were associated with a 
higher proportion of patients converting to AD. The scoring system demonstrated 
good discrimination and calibration in both the training cohort (AUC = 0.879, p 
of Hosmer-Lemeshow test = 0.597) and the validation cohort (AUC = 0.915, p of 
Hosmer-Lemeshow test = 0.991). The risk classification achieved excellent 
sensitivity (0.84) and specificity (0.75).
CONCLUSIONS: The MCI-to-AD conversion score is a reliable tool for predicting 
the risk of disease progression in individuals with MCI.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-240532
PMID: 39240641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2023 Apr;42(4):959-970. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2022.3221890. 
Epub 2023 Apr 3.

ICAM-Reg: Interpretable Classification and Regression With Feature Attribution 
for Mapping Neurological Phenotypes in Individual Scans.

Bass C, Silva MD, Sudre C, Williams LZJ, Sousa HS, Tudosiu PD, Alfaro-Almagro F, 
Fitzgibbon SP, Glasser MF, Smith SM, Robinson EC.

An important goal of medical imaging is to be able to precisely detect patterns 
of disease specific to individual scans; however, this is challenged in brain 
imaging by the degree of heterogeneity of shape and appearance. Traditional 
methods, based on image registration, historically fail to detect variable 
features of disease, as they utilise population-based analyses, suited primarily 
to studying group-average effects. In this paper we therefore take advantage of 
recent developments in generative deep learning to develop a method for 
simultaneous classification, or regression, and feature attribution (FA). 
Specifically, we explore the use of a VAE-GAN (variational autoencoder - general 
adversarial network) for translation called ICAM, to explicitly disentangle 
class relevant features, from background confounds, for improved 
interpretability and regression of neurological phenotypes. We validate our 
method on the tasks of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) cognitive test score 
prediction for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, as 
well as brain age prediction, for both neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration, 
using the developing Human Connectome Project (dHCP) and UK Biobank datasets. We 
show that the generated FA maps can be used to explain outlier predictions and 
demonstrate that the inclusion of a regression module improves the 
disentanglement of the latent space. Our code is freely available on GitHub 
https://github.com/CherBass/ICAM.

DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2022.3221890
PMCID: PMC10315989
PMID: 36374873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Jun 8;9:181. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00181. 
eCollection 2017.

Cerebral Blood Flow and Amyloid-β Interact to Affect Memory Performance in 
Cognitively Normal Older Adults.

Bangen KJ(1)(2), Clark AL(3), Edmonds EC(1)(2), Evangelista ND(1), Werhane 
ML(3), Thomas KR(1)(4), Locano LE(5), Tran M(5), Zlatar ZZ(2), Nation DA(6), 
Bondi MW(2)(4), Delano-Wood L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San DiegoCA, United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La JollaCA, 
United States.
(3)San Diego State University, University of California, San Diego Joint 
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San DiegoCA, United States.
(4)Psychology Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San DiegoCA, United 
States.
(5)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San DiegoCA, United 
States.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los AngelesCA, 
United States.

Cerebral blood flow (CBF) alterations and amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation have been 
independently linked to cognitive deficits in older adults at risk for dementia. 
Less is known about how CBF and Aβ may interact to affect cognition in 
cognitively normal older adults. Therefore, we examined potential statistical 
interactions between CBF and Aβ status in regions typically affected in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) within a sample of older adults from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) study. Sixty-two cognitively normal 
participants (mean age = 72 years) underwent neuroimaging and memory testing. 
Arterial spin labeling magnetic resonance imaging was used to quantify CBF and 
florbetapir PET amyloid imaging was used to measure Aβ deposition. Aβ status 
(i.e., positivity versus negativity) was determined based on established cutoffs 
(Landau et al., 2013). The Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test was used to assess 
memory. Linear regression models adjusted for age, education, and sex, 
demonstrated significant interactions between CBF and Aβ status on memory 
performance. Among Aβ positive older adults, there were significant negative 
associations between higher CBF in hippocampus, posterior cingulate, and 
precuneus and poorer memory performance. In contrast, among Aβ negative older 
adults, there were no significant associations between CBF and cognition. Our 
findings extend previous CBF studies of dementia risk by reporting interactions 
between Aβ status and CBF on memory performance in a sample of 
well-characterized, cognitively normal older adults. Results suggest that 
differential CBF-cognition associations can be identified in healthy, 
asymptomatic Aβ positive older adults relative to Aβ negative individuals. 
Associations between higherCBF and poorer memory among Aβ positive older adults 
may reflect a cellular and/or vascular compensatory response to pathologic 
processes whereby higher CBF is needed to maintain normal memory abilities. 
Findings indicate that CBF and its associations with cognition may have utility 
as a reliable marker of brain function early in the AD process when 
interventions are likely to be beneficial.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00181
PMCID: PMC5463038
PMID: 28642699


160. Front Aging Neurosci. 2024 Jul 16;16:1339163. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1339163. 
eCollection 2024.

Association of modified dementia risk score with cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers 
and cognition in adults without dementia.

Li QY(#)(1), Fu Y(#)(1), Cui XJ(2), Wang ZT(1)(3), Tan L(1)(3); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(2)Department of Outpatient, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Hospital, University of Health and 
Rehabilitation Sciences (Qingdao Municipal Hospital), Qingdao, China.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: This study aimed to investigate the cognitive profile and 
prospective cognitive changes in non-demented adults with elevated Modified 
Dementia Risk Scores (MDRS), while also exploring the potential relationship 
between these associations and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology and neuroinflammation.
METHODS: Within the Chinese Alzheimer's Biomarker and LifestylE (CABLE) 
database, 994 participants without dementia were assessed on MDRS, CSF 
biomarkers and cognition. We examined the associations of the MDRS with CSF 
biomarkers and cognitive scores using linear regressions. Causal mediation 
analyses were conducted to analyze the associations among MDRS, brain 
pathologies, and cognition. The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) study was used to validate the mediation effects and to investigate the 
longitudinal association between MDRS and cognitive decline.
RESULTS: The results revealed that higher MDRS were linked to poorer cognitive 
performance (Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001) and increases in 
CSF levels of phosphorylated tau (P-tau, Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR 
 < 0.001), total tau (T-tau, Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001), 
P-tau/Aβ42 ratio (Model 1: PFDR  = 0.023; Model 2: PFDR  = 0.028), T-tau/Aβ42 
ratio (Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001) and soluble triggering 
receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (sTrem2, Model 1: PFDR  < 0.001; Model 2: 
PFDR  < 0.001) in the CABLE study. The impact of MDRS on cognition was partially 
mediated by neuroinflammation and tau pathology. These mediation effects were 
replicated in the ADNI study. Baseline MDRS were significantly associated with 
future cognitive decline, as indicated by lower scores on the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE, Model 1: PFDR  = 0.045; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001), ADNI 
composite memory score (ADNI-MEM, Model 1: PFDR  = 0.005; Model 2: PFDR 
 < 0.001), ADNI composite executive function score (ADNI-EF, Model 1: PFDR 
 = 0.045; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001), and higher score on the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale (ADAS13, Model 1: PFDR  = 0.045; Model 2: PFDR  < 0.001).
DISCUSSION: The findings of this study revealed significant associations between 
MDRS and cognitive decline, suggesting a potential role of tau pathology and 
neuroinflammation in the link between MDRS and poorer cognitive performance in 
individuals without dementia. Consequently, the MDRS holds promise as a tool for 
targeted preventive interventions in individuals at high risk of cognitive 
impairment.

Copyright © 2024 Li, Fu, Cui, Wang and Tan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2024.1339163
PMCID: PMC11286572
PMID: 39081396

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


161. J Nutr Health Aging. 2024 Dec 10;29(2):100444. doi: 10.1016/j.jnha.2024.100444. 
Online ahead of print.

Impact of diabetes on the progression of Alzheimer's disease via trajectories of 
amyloid-tau-neurodegeneration (ATN) biomarkers.

Kim EW(1), Kim KY(2), Kim E(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
03722, Republic of Korea; Department of Nursing, Seoyeong University, Gwangju 
61268, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National 
University (SMG-SNU) Boramae Medical Center, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, Seoul 07061, Republic of Korea; Department of Psychiatry, 
Laboratory for Alzheimer's Molecular Psychiatry, Institute of Behavioral Science 
in Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: rlarmsdb@gmail.com.
(3)Graduate School of Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
03722, Republic of Korea; Department of Psychiatry, Laboratory for Alzheimer's 
Molecular Psychiatry, Institute of Behavioral Science in Medicine, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea; Graduate School 
of Medical Science, Brain Korea 21 Project, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea; Metabolism-Dementia Research 
Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: eosu.kim@yonsei.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the accumulation of 
abnormal proteins, such as β-amyloid and tau, in the brain, which precedes 
cognitive impairment. Although diabetes mellitus (DM) is a well-established risk 
factor for AD, few studies have investigated how the presence of DM affects the 
sequential pathogenesis of AD, specifically within the 
amyloid-tau-neurodegeneration (ATN) and cognition framework.
OBJECTIVES: This study aims to investigate the trajectories of ATN biomarkers in 
relation to the presence of DM in the preclinical and prodromal stages of AD.
DESIGN: Participants with normal cognition (CN) or mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) at baseline were included. Subjects were followed for 12-192 months, with 
neuroimaging and cognitive assessments conducted at every 12 or 24 months.
SETTING: This study utilized data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI) database.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 603 participants aged 55-90 years were included, 
comprising 284 CN (25 with DM, 259 without DM) and 319 MCI (39 with DM, 280 
without DM) individuals.
MEASUREMENTS: ATN biomarkers were identified using florbetapir positron emission 
tomography (PET), flortaucipir PET, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
respectively. Cognition was assessed using the Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of 
Boxes (CDR-SB) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Moderation analysis was 
conducted to investigate the effect of DM on the association between ATN 
biomarkers of AD.
RESULTS: Elevated amyloid standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) were 
associated with increased tau levels in the hippocampus, and this association 
was significantly enhanced by the presence of DM in MCI participants 
(p = 0.021). DM also strengthened the association between increased tau SUVR 
levels and neurodegeneration (indicated by decreased entorhinal cortical 
volumes; p = 0.005) in those with MCI. Furthermore, DM enhanced the association 
of decreased entorhinal (p = 0.012) and middle temporal cortex (p = 0.031) 
volumes with increased (worsened) CDR-SB scores in MCI participants. However, DM 
did not predict significant longitudinal changes in ATN pathology or cognitive 
decline in CN participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that DM may increase the risk of AD by 
accelerating each step of the A-T-N cascade in the prodromal stage of AD, 
underscoring the importance of DM management in preventing the MCI conversion to 
AD.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnha.2024.100444
PMID: 39662155


162. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;30(2):367-75. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112117.

Risk classification in mild cognitive impairment patients for developing 
Alzheimer's disease.

Zhou B(1), Nakatani E, Teramukai S, Nagai Y, Fukushima M; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Translational Research Informatics Center, Foundation for Biomedical Research 
and Innovation, Kobe, Japan.

The objective of this study was to develop new risk classifications for 
conversion to Alzheimer's disease (AD) by comparing the relative reliability of 
classifiers in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The 397 MCI 
subjects and all baseline data, including characteristics, neuropsychological 
tests, cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and MRI findings in Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), were used for analysis by Cox proportional 
hazard regression, bootstrap sampling, and c-index. Multivariate Cox regression 
analysis revealed the following factors to be associated with increased risk of 
conversion from MCI to AD during the 53-month follow-up period: AVLT 30-minute 
delayed recall, AVLT trial 1, Boston naming, logical delayed recall, 
trail-making B, CDR-sob, ADAS13, the cortical thickness of the right inferior 
temporal lobe (st91ta), and the left hippocampus volume. The combinations of 
ADAS13 at a cutoff point of 15.67 with CDR-sob at 1.5 or with the cortical 
thickness of the right inferior temporal lobe at 2.56 mm3 produced high 
conversion rates of 92.7% (82.4%-100.0%) and 88.8% (77.3%-100.0%), respectively, 
at 48 months. The discriminative ability based on c-index for the proposed 
combination was 0.68. The sample size was estimated as 504 in the group with a 
combination of ADAS13 and CDR-sob whose conversion rate is highest. The 
combination of ADAS13 with CDR-sob at an optimal cutoff point has a high 
reliability in classifying the MCI patients into high- and low-risk conversion 
to AD and will be benefit for patients' assessment and potentially facilitate 
the clinical development of novel therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112117
PMID: 22426014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Mar 10;9:46. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00046. 
eCollection 2017.

Adding Recognition Discriminability Index to the Delayed Recall Is Useful to 
Predict Conversion from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer's Disease in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Russo MJ(1), Campos J(1), Vázquez S(1), Sevlever G(1), Allegri RF(1); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam MM, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Franklin E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, 
Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag 
H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman 
D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Geldmacher D, 
Natelson Love M, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, 
Mitsis E, Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Barker W, Albert 
M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Sadowski M, Sheikh MO, Anaztasia U, 
Mrunalini G, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, 
Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Clark CM, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, 
Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein 
BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, 
Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow 
RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, 
Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GR, Mudge B, 
Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, 
Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, Rogalski E, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, 
Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Villena T, Turner RS, 
Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Yesavage J, Taylor 
JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel 
SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday 
S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, Fletcher E, Maillard P, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, 
Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Burke 
A, Milliken AM, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, 
Scharre DW, Kataki M, Kelley B, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, 
Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, 
Leslie G, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Tremont G, Daiello LA, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer 
K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Smith KE, Koleva H, Nam KW, Shim H, 
Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, 
Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust 
W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, 
Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Devon 
G, Sather T, Melissa D, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Jacqueline H, Shannon 
F, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kejal K, Chad W, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Karen C, Scott N, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Karl F, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Mauricio B, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, 
Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Mintzer 
J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, 
Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling JJ, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, 
Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chiang G, Ravdin L, Ravdin 
L.

Author information:
(1)Author Affiliations: UC San Francisco; University of Southern California; UC 
San Francisco University of Southern California Mayo Clinic, Rochester Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester; UC Berkeley; U Pennsylvania; USC; UC Davis; Brigham and 
Women's Hospital/Harvard Medical School Indiana University Washington University 
St. Louis University of Pennsylvania; Prevent Alzheimer's Disease 2020 (Chair) 
Siemens; Alzheimer's Association University of Pittsburgh Washington University 
St. Louis Cornell University; Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva 
University; AD Drug Discovery Foundation; Acumen Pharmaceuticals; Washington 
University St. Louis; Northwestern University; National Institute of Mental 
Health; Brown University; Eli Lilly (Chair); BWH/HMS (Chair); University of 
Washington (Chair); Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core PI) University of Southern 
California; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San 
Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC Davis (Core 
PI); UC Davis; UC San Diego; Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core PI); Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester; University of London; UCLA School of Medicine; UCSF MRI; UC Davis; 
Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; 
Mayo Clinic; UC Berkeley (Core PI); University of Michigan; University of Utah; 
Banner Alzheimer's Institute; Banner Alzheimer's Institute; University of 
Pittsburgh; UC Berkeley; Washington University St. Louis; Washington University 
St. Louis; Washington University St. Louis; Washington University St. Louis; 
UPenn School of Medicine; UPenn School of Medicine; UPenn School of Medicine; 
UPenn School of Medicine; UPenn School of Medicine; USC (Core PI); USC; USC; 
Indiana University; Indiana University; UC Irvine; Indiana University; Indiana 
University; Indiana University; Indiana University; UC San Francisco; UC San 
Diego; Prevent Alzheimer's Disease 2020; UC San Diego; National Institute on 
Aging; UC San Francisco; Brown University; National Institute of Mental Health; 
Cornell University; Johns Hopkins University; Richard Frank Consulting; Prevent 
Alzheimer's Disease 2020; National Institute on Aging; Oregon Health & Science 
University; University of Southern California; University of California - San 
Diego; University of Michigan; Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Baylor College of 
Medicine; Columbia University Medical Center; Washington University, St. Louis; 
University of Alabama - Birmingham; Mount Sinai School of Medicine; Rush 
University Medical Center; Wien Center; Johns Hopkins University; New York 
University; Duke University Medical Center; University of Pennsylvania; 
University of Kentucky; University of Pittsburgh; University of Rochester 
Medical Center; University of California, Irvine; University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical School; Emory University; University of Kansas, Medical 
Center; University of California, Los Angeles; Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville; 
Indiana University; Yale University School of Medicine; McGill Univ., 
Montreal-Jewish General Hospital; Sunnybrook Health Sciences, Ontario; U.B.C. 
Clinic for AD & Related Disorders; Cognitive Neurology - St. Joseph's, Ontario; 
Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health; Northwestern University; 
Premiere Research Inst (Palm Beach Neurology); Georgetown University Medical 
Center; Brigham and Women's Hospital; Stanford University; Banner Sun Health 
Research Institute; Boston University; Howard University; Case Western Reserve 
University; University of California, Davis - Sacramento; Neurological Care of 
CNY; Parkwood Hospital; University of Wisconsin; University of California, 
Irvine - BIC; Banner Alzheimer's Institute; Dent Neurologic Institute; Ohio 
State University; Albany Medical College; Hartford Hospital, Olin 
Neuropsychiatry Research Center; Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center; Wake Forest 
University Health Sciences; Rhode Island Hospital; Butler Hospital; UC San 
Francisco; Medical University South Carolina; St. Joseph's Health Care; Nathan 
Kline Institute; University of Iowa College of Medicine; Cornell University; 
University of South Florida: USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute; University 
of California, San Francisco; University of Southern California; UC San 
Francisco; University of Southern California; Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Brigham 
and Women's Hospital/ Harvard Medical School; UC Davis; Mayo Clinic, Rochester; 
UC Berkeley; Washington University St. Louis; Indiana University; Perelman 
School of Medicine, UPenn; USC; Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania; UC San Francisco; Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University; BWH/HMS (Chair); University of 
Washington (Chair); Core PI; Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core PI); University of 
Southern California; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC 
San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Diego; UC San Francisco; UC San Francisco; UC 
San Francisco; UC Davis (Core PI); UC San Diego; Mayo Clinic, Rochester (Core 
PI); Mayo Clinic, Rochester; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; Mayo Clinic; 
Mayo Clinic; UC Berkeley (Core PI); University of Michigan; University of Utah; 
Banner Alzheimer's Institute; Banner Alzheimer's Institute; UC Berkeley; 
Washington University St. Louis; Washington University St. Louis; Washington 
University St. Louis; Perelman School of Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of 
Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of 
Medicine, UPenn; Perelman School of Medicine, UPenn; USC (Core PI); USC; USC; 
Indiana University; Indiana University; UC Irvine; Indiana University; Indiana 
University; Indiana University; Indiana University; UC San Francisco; Department 
of Defense (retired); University of Southern California; University of 
California, San Diego; Columbia University Medical Center; Rush University 
Medical Center; Wien Center; Duke University Medical Center; University of 
Rochester Medical Center; University of California, Irvine; Medical University 
South Carolina; Premiere Research Inst (Palm Beach Neurology); University of 
California, San Francisco; Georgetown University Medical Center; Brigham and 
Women's Hospital; Banner Sun Health Research Institute; Howard University; 
University of Wisconsin; University of Washington; Stanford University; Cornell 
University.

Background: Ongoing research is focusing on the identification of those 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who are most likely to convert 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD). We investigated whether recognition memory tasks in 
combination with delayed recall measure of episodic memory and CSF biomarkers 
can predict MCI to AD conversion at 24-month follow-up. Methods: A total of 397 
amnestic-MCI subjects from Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative were 
included. Logistic regression modeling was done to assess the predictive value 
of all RAVLT measures, risk factors such as age, sex, education, APOE genotype, 
and CSF biomarkers for progression to AD. Estimating adjusted odds ratios was 
used to determine which variables would produce an optimal predictive model, and 
whether adding tests of interaction between the RAVLT Delayed Recall and 
recognition measures (traditional score and d-prime) would improve prediction of 
the conversion from a-MCI to AD. Results: 112 (28.2%) subjects developed 
dementia and 285 (71.8%) subjects did not. Of the all included variables, CSF 
Aβ1-42 levels, RAVLT Delayed Recall, and the combination of RAVLT Delayed Recall 
and d-prime were predictive of progression to AD (χ2 = 38.23, df = 14, p < 
0.001). Conclusions: The combination of RAVLT Delayed Recall and d-prime 
measures may be predictor of conversion from MCI to AD in the ADNI cohort, 
especially in combination with amyloid biomarkers. A predictive model to help 
identify individuals at-risk for dementia should include not only traditional 
episodic memory measures (delayed recall or recognition), but also additional 
variables (d-prime) that allow the homogenization of the assessment procedures 
in the diagnosis of MCI.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00046
PMCID: PMC5344912
PMID: 28344552


164. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 19;6(4):e16973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016973.

Intra-individual variability in Alzheimer's disease and cognitive aging: 
definitions, context, and effect sizes.

Tractenberg RE(1), Pietrzak RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, 
Washington, DC, United States of America. ret7@georgetown.edu

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To explore different definitions of intra-individual 
variability (IIV) to summarize performance on commonly utilized cognitive tests 
(Mini Mental State Exam; Clock Drawing Test); compare them and their potential 
to differentiate clinically-defined populations; and to examine their utility in 
predicting clinical change in individuals from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: Sample statistics were computed from ADNI cohorts with no cognitive 
diagnosis, a diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and a diagnosis of 
possible or probable Alzheimer's disease (AD). Nine different definitions of IIV 
were computed for each sample, and standardized effect sizes (Cohen's d) were 
computed for each of these definitions in 500 simulated replicates using scores 
on the Mini Mental State Exam and Clock Drawing Test. IIV was computed based on 
test items separately ('within test' IIV) and the two tests together ('across 
test' IIV). The best performing definition was then used to compute IIV for a 
third test, the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive, and the 
simulations and effect sizes were again computed. All effect size estimates 
based on simulated data were compared to those computed based on the total 
scores in the observed data. Association between total score and IIV summaries 
of the tests and the Clinician's Dementia Rating were estimated to test the 
utility of IIV in predicting clinically meaningful changes in the cohorts over 
12- and 24-month intervals.
RESULTS: ES estimates differed substantially depending on the definition of IIV 
and the test(s) on which IIV was based. IIV (coefficient of variation) summaries 
of MMSE and Clock-Drawing performed similarly to their total scores, the ADAS 
total performed better than its IIV summary.
CONCLUSION: IIV can be computed within (items) or across (totals) items on 
commonly-utilized cognitive tests, and may provide a useful additional summary 
measure of neuropsychological test performance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016973
PMCID: PMC3079725
PMID: 21526188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: RET is an academic editor 
at PLoS ONE. RHP declares no competing interests. ADNI is funded by the National 
Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and 
Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following: Abbott, 
AstraZeneca AB, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eisai Global 
Clinical Development, Elan Corporation, Genentech, GE Healthcare, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Innogenetics, Johnson and Johnson, Eli Lilly and Co., Medpace, 
Inc., Merck and Co., Inc., Novartis AG, Pfizer Inc, F. Hoffman-La Roche, 
Schering-Plough, Synarc, Inc., and Wyeth, as well as non-profit partners the 
Alzheimer's Association and Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, with 
participation from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Private sector 
contributions to ADNI are facilitated by the Foundation for the National 
Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern 
California Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by 
the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San 
Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro-Imaging at the 
University of California, Los Angeles. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


165. Hum Brain Mapp. 2019 Oct 1;40(14):4279-4286. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24701. Epub 2019 
Jun 26.

Characterization of a temporoparietal junction subtype of Alzheimer's disease.

Meyer F(1), Wehenkel M(1)(2), Phillips C(1), Geurts P(2), Hustinx R(3), Bernard 
C(3), Bastin C(1), Salmon E(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)GIGA-Cyclotron Research Centre in vivo imaging, University of Liège, Liège, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of 
Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Nuclear Medecine Department, CHU of Liège, University of Liège, Liège, 
Belgium.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) subtypes have been described according to genetics, 
neuropsychology, neuropathology, and neuroimaging. Thirty-one patients with 
clinically probable AD were selected based on perisylvian metabolic decrease on 
FDG-PET. They were compared to 25 patients with a typical pattern of decreased 
posterior metabolism. Tree-based machine learning was used on those 56 images to 
create a classifier that was subsequently applied to 207 Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) patients with AD. Machine learning was also used 
to discriminate between the two ADNI groups based on neuropsychological scores. 
Compared to AD patients with a typical precuneus metabolic decrease, the new 
subtype showed stronger hypometabolism in the temporoparietal junction. The 
classifier was able to distinguish the two groups in the ADNI population. Both 
groups could only be distinguished cognitively by Trail Making Test-A scores. 
This study further confirms that there is more than a typical metabolic pattern 
in probable AD with amnestic presentation.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.24701
PMCID: PMC6865402
PMID: 31243829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Med Phys. 2024 Jun;51(6):4105-4120. doi: 10.1002/mp.16984. Epub 2024 Feb 19.

An effective and robust lattice Boltzmann model guided by atlas for hippocampal 
subregions segmentation.

Liu Y(1)(2)(3), Wang M(2), Yu X(4), Han Y(4), Jiang J(2), Yan Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Electrical Engineering, Shandong University of Aeronautics, 
Binzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Given the varying vulnerability of the rostral and caudal regions of 
the hippocampus to neuropathology in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) continuum, 
accurately assessing structural changes in these subregions is crucial for early 
AD detection. The development of reliable and robust automatic segmentation 
methods for hippocampal subregions (HS) is of utmost importance.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to propose and validate a HS segmentation model that is 
both training-free and highly generalizable. This method should exhibit 
comparable accuracy and efficiency to state-of-the-art techniques. The segmented 
HS can serve as a biomarker for studying the progression of AD.
METHODS: We utilized the functional magnetic resonance imaging of the Brain's 
Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST) to segment the entire 
hippocampus. By intersecting the segmentation results with the Brainnetome (BN) 
atlas, we obtained coarse segmentation of the four HS regions. This coarse 
segmentation was then employed as a shape prior term in the lattice Boltzmann 
(LB) model, as well as for initializing contours. Additionally, image gradients 
and local gray levels were integrated into the external force terms of the LB 
model to refine the coarse segmentation results. We assessed the segmentation 
accuracy of the model using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) dataset and evaluated the potential of the segmentation results as AD 
biomarkers on both the ADNI and Xuanwu datasets.
RESULTS: The median Dice similarity coefficients (DSC) for the left caudal, 
right caudal, left rostral, and right rostral hippocampus were 0.87, 0.88, 0.88, 
and 0.89, respectively. The proportion of segmentation results with a DSC 
exceeding 0.8 was 77%, 78%, 77%, and 94% for the respective regions. In terms of 
volume, the correlation coefficients between the segmentation results of the 
four HS regions and the gold standard were 0.95, 0.93, 0.96, and 0.96, 
respectively. Regarding asymmetry, the correlation coefficient between the 
segmentation result's right caudal minus left caudal and the corresponding gold 
standard was 0.91, while for right rostral minus left rostral, it was 0.93. Over 
time, we observed a decline in the volumes of the four HS regions and the total 
hippocampal volume of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) converters. Analysis of 
inter-group differences revealed that, except for the right rostral region in 
the ADNI dataset, the p-values for the four HS regions in the normal controls 
(NC), MCI, and AD groups from both datasets were all below 0.05. The right 
caudal hippocampal volume demonstrated correlation coefficients of 0.47 and 0.43 
with the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and Montreal cognitive assessment 
(MoCA), respectively. Similarly, the left rostral hippocampal volume showed 
correlation coefficients of 0.50 and 0.58 with MMSE and MoCA, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our framework allows for direct application to different brain 
magnetic resonance (MR) datasets without the need for training. It eliminates 
the requirement for complex image preprocessing steps while achieving 
segmentation accuracy comparable to deep learning (DL) methods even with small 
sample sizes. Compared to traditional active contour models (ACM) and 
atlas-based methods, our approach exhibits significant speed advantages. The 
segmented HS regions hold promise as potential biomarkers for studying the 
progression of AD.

© 2024 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mp.16984
PMID: 38373278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2019 Aug 7;5:364-373. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2019.06.004. 
eCollection 2019.

Identification of prognostic factors to predict cognitive decline of patients 
with early Alzheimer's disease in the Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative study.

Yagi T(1), Kanekiyo M(2), Ito J(3), Ihara R(4), Suzuki K(4), Iwata A(5), 
Iwatsubo T(6), Aoshima K(1); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Eisai Co., Ltd., Koishikawa, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Eisai Inc., Woodcliff Lake, NJ, USA.
(3)Eisai Co., Ltd., Tokodai, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan.
(4)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to determine the factors including 
neuropsychological test performances and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers 
which can predict disease progression of early Alzheimer's disease (AD) in a 
Japanese population.
METHODS: The group classification on early AD population in both Japanese 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (J-ADNI) and North American ADNI 
(NA-ADNI) was performed using the inclusion criteria including brain amyloid 
positivity on positron emission tomography or CSF. Participants with early AD 
from each cohort were stratified into two groups based on a cutoff 1.0 of 
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) change at month 24 (m24): 
participants in "progress group" have CDR-SB change ≥ 1.0 and participants in 
"stable group" have CDR-SB change < 1.0. Then, we performed identification of 
prognostic factors from baseline items including neuropsychological scores 
(Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale[ADAS-cog 13], Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), CDR, FAQ, and Geriatric Depression Scale ), CSF markers (t-tau, p-tau, 
and beta-amyloid 1-42), vital signs (body weight, pulse rate, etc.,), by using 
two statistical approaches, Welch's t-test and simple linear regression by 
ordinary least squares. Comparisons between participants with J-ADNI and 
participants with NA-ADNI were also performed.
RESULTS: Trends of CDR-SB changes were very similar between J-ADNI and NA-ADNI 
early AD population enrolled in this study. Baseline levels of CSF t-tau, p-tau, 
Mini-Mental State Examination, FAQ, and ADAS-cog13 were identified as prognostic 
factors in both J-ADNI and NA-ADNI. Based on a detailed subscale analysis on 
ADAS-cog13, four subscales (Q1: word recall, Q3: construction, Q4: delayed word 
recall, and Q8: word recognition) were identified as prognostic factors in both 
J-ADNI and NA-ADNI.
DISCUSSION: Characterizing population with early AD can provide benefits for 
promoting efficiency in conducting AD clinical trials for disease-modifying 
treatments. Thus, implementing these prognostic factors into clinical trials may 
be potentially a good method to enrich participants with early AD who are 
suitable for evaluating treatment effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2019.06.004
PMCID: PMC6698925
PMID: 31440579


168. Turk J Med Sci. 2024 Jan 5;54(4):688-699. doi: 10.55730/1300-0144.5838. 
eCollection 2024.

Can volumetric magnetic resonance imaging evaluations be helpful in the 
follow-up of cognitive functions in cognitively normal Parkinson's disease 
patients?

Uysal HA(1), Hünerli D(2), Çakmur R(3), Dönmez Çolakoğlu B(3), Ada E(4), Yener 
G(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, İzmir University of Economics, Medical Point 
Hospital, İzmir, Turkiye.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Health Sciences, Dokuz Eylül 
University, İzmir, Turkiye.
(3)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, 
Turkiye.
(4)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, 
Turkiye.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, İzmir University of Economics, İzmir, Turkiye.
(6)İzmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, İzmir, Turkiye.

BACKGROUND/AIM: In this study, besides the evaluation of gray and white matter 
changes in cognitively normal Parkinson's disease (PD-CN) patients with 
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) parameters, it was tried to show 
that some neuropsychological tests may be impaired in PD-CN patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-six PD-CN patients and 26 healthy elderly (HC) 
participants were included in the current study. Global cognitive status was 
assessed using the mini-mental state examination (MMSE), and the Montreal 
cognitive assessment scale (MoCA). Attention and executive functions were 
evaluated using the Wechsler memory scale-revised (WMS-R) digit span test and 
trail making test (TMT) part A and part B, the Stroop test, semantic and 
phonemic fluency tests, and clock drawing test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
was acquired according to the Alzheimer's disease neuroimaging initiative (ADNI) 
protocol.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences among groups regarding age, sex, 
handedness, and years of education. In the comparison of the PD-CN group and the 
HC group, there was a statistical decrease in the total animal scores, lexical 
fluency, TMT part A and TMT part B scores in the PD-CN group. Subcortical gray 
matter volumes (GMV) were significantly lower in PD-CN patients. The PD-CN group 
had a significantly reduced total volume of right putamen and left angular gyrus 
compared to that in the HC group. We observed that putamen and angular gyrus 
volumes were lower in PD-CN patients. On the other hand, TMT part B may be a 
useful pretest in detecting the conversion of mild cognitive impairment in PD.
CONCLUSION: Significant MRI volumetric measurements and neuropsychological test 
batteries can be helpful in the clinical follow-up in PD-CN patients.

© TÜBİTAK.

DOI: 10.55730/1300-0144.5838
PMCID: PMC11407370
PMID: 39295615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


169. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jul;33(7):1486.e9-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.008. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Using CSF biomarkers to replicate genetic associations in Alzheimer's disease.

Schott JM(1); ADNI Investigators.

Collaborators: Abdi H, Abdul Hadi N, Abdulkadir A, Abdullah A, Achuthan A, 
Adluru N, Aggarwal N, Aghajanian J, Agyemang A, Ahdidan J, Ahmad D, Ahmed F, 
Ahmed S, Ahmed F, Akbarifar R, Akhondi-Asl A, Aksu Y, Alcauter S, Alexander D, 
Alin A, Alshuft H, Alvarez-Linera J, Amin-Mansour A, Anderson J, Anderson D, 
Andorn A, Andrews KA, Ang A, Angersbach S, Ansarian R, Abhishek AM, Appannah A, 
Arfanakis K, Arif M, Armentrout S, Arrighi M, Arumughababu SV, Arunagiri V, 
Ashe-McNalley C, Ashford W, Le Page A, Avants B, Aviv R, Avula R, Ayache N, 
Ayan-Oshodi M, Ayhan M, Sumana BV, Bach Cuadra M, Bagepally B, Bahar Fuchs A, 
Baird G, Baker S, Baker J, Bakker A, Baladandayuthapani V, Barbash S, Barillot 
C, Barker W, Bartlett J, Bartley M, Baruchin A, Battaglini I, Bauer C, Bayley P, 
Becker J, Beckett L, Bednar M, Bedner A, Beg MF, Bekris L, Belaroussi B, Belloch 
V, Belmokhtar N, Ben Ahmed O, Bender JD, Bendib MM, Benois-Pineau J, 
Bhagchandani S, Bienkowska K, Biffi A, Bilgin G, Billing B, Bishop C, Bittner D, 
Björnsdotter M, Black S, Bloss C, Blunck Y, Bocti C, Bohorquez A, Bokde A, Boone 
J, Boord P, Boot B, Borrie M, Boudousq V, Bourgeat P, Bouttout H, Bowman D, 
Bowman G, Boxer A, Bozoki A, Bracard S, Braskie M, Breitner J, Bresell A, Brewer 
J, Brickhouse M, Brickman A, Britschgi M, Broadbent S, Brock B, Brown M, 
Buchsbaum M, Buerger K, Bunce D, Burnham S, Burns J, Burzykowski T, Butler T, 
Cabeza R, Cabral G, Caffery T, Cai Z, Callhoff J, Calvini P, Campbell N, 
Carbotti A, Carle A, Carmasin J, Carmasin J, Carpenter J, Carvalho J, Casanova 
R, Casey A, Cash D, Cash D, Cataldo R, Cella M, Chadaga A, Chakravarty M, Chang 
I, Chao L, Chaovalitwongse WA, Charil A, Chatterjee S, Che-Wei C, Chen K, Chen 
G, Chen S, Chen R, Chen IJ, Chen JT, Chen C, Chen J, Chen Q, Chen H, Cheng WC, 
Cheng X, Cheng B, Cherkas Y, Chertkow H, Chiang G, Chiao P, chibane MB, Chida N, 
Chin S, Ching C, Chisholm J, Cho SS, Cho C, Choe J, Choubey S, Chowbina S, 
Ciocia G, Clark D, Clarkson M, Clerc S, Climer S, Clunie D, Coen M, Coimbra A, 
Compton D, Conover J, Coubard O, Coulin S, Coulson E, Cover KS, Crans G, 
Crawford K, Croop R, Crum W, Cui Y, Da L, Dai Y, Daiello L, Daiello L, Darkner 
S, Darnell R, Davatzikos C, DavidPrakash B, Davidson C, Davis M, de Bruijne M, 
DeCarli C, Decker S, DeDuck K, Dehghan H, Della Rosa PA, DeOrchis V, Dépy Carron 
D, Desikan R, Desjardins B, deToledo-Morrell L, Devanand D, Devanarayan V, 
Devier D, Devous M, Di X, Di J, Diaz-Arrastia R, Diciotti S, Dickerson B, Dickie 
DA, Dickinson P, Dill V, Ding X, Dinov I, Dobosh B, Dobson H, Dodge H, Dolman A, 
Dolmo BC, Dong W, Donohue M, Dore V, Dorflinger E, Dowling M, Dowling M, 
Dragicevic N, Dricot L, Duchesne S, Duff K, Dukart J, Durazzo T, Dutta J, DWors 
R, Egefjord L, Elcoroaristizabal X, Emahazion T, Emahazion T, Endres C, Epstein 
N, Ereshefsky L, Eskildsen S, Espinosa A, Esposito M, Ewers M, Ewers M, Falcone 
G, Fan J, Fan Y, Fan Z, Fang Z, Farahibozorg S, Farahmandpoor Z, Farb N, Fardo 
D, Farias S, Farnum M, Farrer L, Fatke B, Faux N, Favilla S, Fazlollahi A, 
Feldman B, Félix Z, Fennema-Notestine C, Fernandes M, Fernandez S, Fernandez E, 
Ferrari R, Ferrer E, Fetterman B, Figurski M, Fillit H, Finch S, Finger E, Fiot 
JB, Flenniken D, Fletcher E, Flores C, Flynn Longmire C, Focke N, Forsythe A, 
Fox A, Fox A, Foxhall S, Franko E, Frederick B, Freeman R, Freire R, Friedrich 
CM, Friesenhahn M, Frisoni G, Fritzsche K, Fujiwara K, Fullerton T, Gaffour Y, 
Galbraith S, Galvin B, Gamst A, Gan K, Gao S, Garcia G, Garg G, Gaser C, 
Gastineau E, Gattaz W, Gaubert M, Gaudreau A, Gauthier S, Gavidia G, Gemme G, 
Geraci J, Gholipour F, Ghosh S, Ghosh D, Gieschke R, Gill R, Gillespie W, 
Gispert JD, Gitelman D, Gkontra X, Gleason C, Glymour MM, Godbey M, Gold B, 
Goldberg T, Goldman J, Gomar J, Gonzalez-Beltran A, Gore C, Gorriz JM, Goto M, 
Gou JI, Gradkowski W, Grasela T, Gray K, Gregory E, Greicius M, Grill J, 
Grolmusz V, Gross A, Gross A, Grydeland H, Guignot I, Guillaume B, Guilloux F, 
Guo LH, Guo H, Gupta V, Gurney G, Guyot J, Haas M, Habeck C, Habte F, Haight T, 
Hajaj C, Hajiesmaeili M, Hajjar I, Hammarstrom P, Han Z, Han D, Hanna Y, 
Hanna-Pladdy B, Hao Y, Hardy P, Harrison J, Harvey D, Harvey D, Hassanzadeh O, 
Hayashi T, Haynes JD, He Y, He H, Head D, Heckemann R, Heegaard N, Heidarieh SM, 
Heidebrink J, Hellyer P, Helwig M, Henderson D, Herholz K, Hess C, Hill S, 
Hisaka A, Ho Ming AY, Hobart J, Hochstetler H, Hofer S, Hoffman J, Holder D, 
Hollingworth P, Holmes R, Hong L, Hong H, Hong Q, Honigberg L, Hoogenraad F, 
Hope T, Hot T, Hsieh H, Hsu A, Hu M, Hu W, Hu X, Hu C, Hua WY, Huang X, Huang 
CJ, Huang Y, Huang J, Huang Z, Huentelman M, Huppertz HJ, Hurt S, Hussain M, 
Hutchins J, Hwang S, Hyun J, Ifeachor E, Iglesias M, Ikari Y, Ikonomidou V, Iman 
A, Imani F, Inlow M, Inoue L, Insel P, Irizarry M, Ishibashi T, Ishii K, Ito K, 
Iwatsubo T, Jacks A, Jacobson M, Jacqmin P, Jaeger M, Jaeger P, Jagger R, Jagust 
W, Janousova E, Jara H, Jedynak B, Jefferson A, Jenq J, Jiang T, Jiang C, Jiao 
Y, Jiaolong Q, Jin K, Johnson S, Johnson J, Johnson K, Jones R, Jones G, Jones 
M, Joshi R, Joshi S, Joshi A, Jouvent E, Juengling F, Jung W, Junjie Z, Muthamma 
KG, Kabilan M, Kairui Z, Kaludov N, Kam HJ, Kamakura V, Kamer A, Kanakaraj S, 
Kanchev V, Kaneko T, Kaneta T, Kang JH, Kang H, Kang J, Karantzoulis S, Katz I, 
Kaushik SS, Kauwe J, Kauwe J, Kawashima S, Kaye E, Kazemi S, Ke H, Kelleher T, 
Kennedy R, Keogh B, Kerchner G, Kerr D, Keshava N, Khalil A, Khondker Z, 
Khondker Z, Kiddle S, Kihara T, Killeen N, Killiany R, Kim JH, Kim JH, Kim D, 
Kim D, Kimberg D, King R, Kingery L, Kirby J, Kirsch W, Klein G, Klimas M, Kline 
R, Klopfenstein E, Koen J, Koenig L, Koikkalainen J, Kokomoor A, Kong X, Kong X, 
Koppel J, Korolev I, Kotamarti RM, Krahnke T, Krams M, Kraybill M, Kuceyeski A, 
Kuceyeski A, Kumar V, Kumar Roy P, Kuo J, Kyrtsos CR, Labib V, Labrish C, Lai S, 
Lakatos A, Lalonde F, Lam SC, Landau S, Lane B, Langbaum J, Langford D, Lanius 
V, Lasch S, Latella M, Lau H, Leatherday C, Lebedev A, Lee S, Lee Ja, Lee D, Lee 
G, Legal S, Lei H, Lemaitre H, Lenfant P, Leonards U, Leong J, Leoutsakos JM, 
Leung YY, Leung K, Levey A, Li M, Li L, Li J, Li Y, Li M, Li J, Li Y, Li Y, Li 
J, Li W, Li X, Li R, Li Q, Liang K, Liang P, Liao S, Liao W, Liaquat S, Liaw C, 
Liberman G, Lilley P, Lim JS, Lin F, Lin X, Linninger A, Liu S, Liu X, Liu G, 
Liu Y, Liu Y, Liu T, Liu L, Liu M, Liu T, Liu W, Liu C, Liu T, Liu Y, Liu X, Liu 
T, Liu H, Liu D, Liu X, Liu Y, Llido J, Lo R, Lobach I, Lobanov V, Lockhart A, 
Long X, Long Z, Long M, Looi J, Lu Y, Lu PH, Lu H, Lucena N, Luis J, Lukas C, 
Lukic A, Luo X, Luo S, Luo L, Luo W, Luo X, Ma SL, Ma SM, Mackin S, Mada M, 
Madabhushi A, Madeira S, Magland J, Mahanta MS, Maikusa N, Maldjian J, Malpas C, 
Mandal I, Mandal P, Mang A, Mangin JF, Manjon J, Mantri N, Manzour A, Marcus D, 
Margolin R, Marrett S, Marshall G, Martinez Gonzalez A, Martinez Torteya A, 
Martins R, Mather M, Mathis C, Matoug S, Mattei P, Matthews D, Mattis P, 
McCarroll S, McConathy J, McDonald C, McEvoy L, McGeown W, McGinnis S, McGonigle 
J, Randal McIntosh A, McIntyre J, McLaren D, McMillan C, McQuail J, Meadowcroft 
M, Meda S, Melie-Garcia L, Melrose R, Mendelson A, Mendez M, Menendez E, Meng M, 
Meng M, Meredith J, Meyer M, Meyer C, Mez J, Mickael G, Mikula M, Miller M, 
Millikin C, Mintun M, Mitchell M, Mitsis E, Mon A, Moore D, Morabito FC, Birgani 
PM, Moratal D, Morimoto B, Morris J, Morris J, Mortamet B, Moscato P, 
Mourao-Miranda J, Mueller S, Mueller K, Mukherjee S, Mukund N, Mulder E, Mungas 
D, Munir K, Murayama S, Murphy K, Sairam N, Nagata K, Nair A, Narayana P, 
Nasrabadi S, Nativio R, Nazeri A, Nejad L, Nekooei S, Nemeth I, Nencka A, 
Nettiksimmons J, Neu S, Ng YB, Nguyen N, Nguyen H, Nichols T, Niecko T, Nielsen 
C, Niethammer M, Nishio T, Noda A, Nordstrom M, Noshad S, Notomi K, Novak N, 
Nutakki GC, O'Charoen S, Obisesan T, Oh J, Okonkwo O, Rikkert MO, Oliveira J, 
Oliveira A, Oliver R, Olmos S, Oltra J, Ong R, Osadebey M, Osadebey M, 
Ostrowitzki S, Ovando Vazquez CM, Overholser R, Anishiya P, Chitra PK, Pa J, Pa 
J, Palanisamy P, Pan S, Pan G, Pan Z, Pande Y, Pardo J, Pardoe H, Park H, Park 
L, Park J, Park S, Parker C, Patel Y, Patil M, Patil A, Pawlak M, Payoux P, 
Pennec X, Pereira F, Perlbarg V, Perneczky R, Peters F, Petitti D, Petrella J, 
Petrou M, Peyrat JM, Pham Ngoc PT, Phillips J, Phillips N, Pian WT, Pierson R, 
Piovezan M, Pipitone J, Pirraglia E, Planes X, Podhorski A, Poirier J, Pomara N, 
Popov V, Poppenkv J, Potkin S, Potter G, Poulin S, Prastawa M, Prince J, Priya 
K, Pruessner J, Qiu W, Qu A, Qualls CD, Quarg P, Quinlan J, Rabbia M, 
Rajagovindan R, Rajeesh R, Ramadubramani V, Ramage A, Ramirez A, Randolph C, Rao 
A, Rao H, Reed B, Reid A, Reilhac A, Reiner P, Reinsberger C, Reiss P, Ren J, 
Retico A, Rhatigan L, Rhinn H, Rhoades E, Ribbens A, Richard E, Richards J, 
Richter M, Riddle W, Ridgway G, Ringman J, Rizk-Jackson A, Rizzi M, Rodriguez N, 
Rodriguez L, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, Rogalski E, Rojas Balderrama J, Rokicki J, 
Romero K, Rosand J, Rosen O, Rostant O, Rousseau F, Roy M, Rubright J, Rucinski 
M, Ruiz A, Rulseh A, Rusinek H, Ryan L, Sabuncu M, Saculva M, Sahuquillo J, Said 
Y, Saito N, Sakata M, Salama M, Salazar D, Saman S, Sanchez L, Sanders E, Sankar 
T, Santhamma S, Sarwinda D, Sasaki T, Sasaya T, Sato H, Sattlecker M, Savio A, 
Saykin A, Scanlon B, Scharre D, Schegerin M, Schmand B, Schmansky N, 
Schmidt-Wilcke T, Schneider B, Schott J, Schramm H, Schuerch M, Schultz T, 
Schwartz E, Schwartz P, Schwarz J, Schwarz A, Schweizer T, Selnes P, Sembritzki 
K, Senjem M, Sfikas G, Sghedoni R, Shah JH, Shahbaba B, Shams S, Shankle W, 
Shattuck D, Shaw L, Shen J, Shen Q, Shen J, Shen Q, Shera D, Sherer E, Sherman 
M, Sherva R, Shi J, Shi Y, Shi Y, Shi F, Shilaskar S, Shinohara R, Shokouhi S, 
Shulman J, Sideris K, Siegel R, Silveira M, Silverman D, Simak A, Simmons A, 
Simoes R, Simon H, Simon A, Simonson A, Simpson D, Simpson I, Singh L, Singh N, 
Sinha N, Siuciak J, Sjögren N, Skinner J, Skudlarski P, Smith M, Smith C, Snyder 
P, Soares H, Soldan A, Soldea O, Solomon A, Som S, Song S, Song Z, Sosova I, 
Sotolongo-Grau O, Soydemir M, Spampinato MV, Speier W, Sperling R, Spiegel R, 
Spies L, Springate B, Spychalla A, Staff R, Steenland N, Steffener J, Stern Y, 
Stokman H, Stolzenberg E, Stricker N, Stühler E, Su S, Subramaniam R, Suen S, 
Sugishita M, Suk HI, Suk HI, Sukkar R, Sullivan J, Summers D, Sun H, Sun M, Sun 
Y, Sun Y, Sun J, Sundell K, Sutphen C, Svetnik V, Swamy Y, Swan M, Symons S, 
Szafranska K, Szigeti K, Szoeke C, Sørensen L, Genish T, Takeuchi T, Tanaka R, 
Tanaka S, Tanchi C, Tancredi D, Tang Q, Tanzi R, Tarnow E, Tartaglia MC, Tarver 
E, Tassy D, Tauber C, Taylor-Reinwald L, Teipel S, Teng E, Termenon M, Terriza 
F, Thambisetty M, Thames A, Thatavarti RS, Thiele F, Thomas B, Thomas R, Thomas 
C, Thomas C, Thompson P, Thompson P, Thompson W, Thompson J, Thornton-Wells T, 
Thorvaldsson V, Till H, Tokuda T, Toledo JB, Toma A, Tomita N, Toro R, 
Torrealdea P, Toschi N, Tosto G, Tosun D, Toussaint P, Toyoshiba H, Tractenberg 
RE, Triggs T, Trittschuh E, Trotta G, Truong Huu T, Truran D, Tsalikakis D, 
Tsanas A, Tsang C, Tufail A, Tung J, Turken A, Turner R, Tyagi P, Ueda Y, 
Uematsu D, Ullrich L, Umar N, Ungar L, Valenzuela O, Van de Nes J, van der Lijn 
F, Van Hecke W, Van Horn J, Van Leemput K, Van Train K, Varaganti R, Varkuti B, 
Vasanawala M, Veeraraghavan H, Vellay S, Vemuri P, Verma M, Vinke L, Vinyes G, 
Visser PJ, Vitek M, Vogel S, Voineskos A, Vos S, Vounou M, Wade S, Walsh A, Wang 
A, Wang T, Wang S, Wang DJ, Wang J, Wang Z, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang Y, Wang YM, 
Wang LS, Wang Z, Wang L, Wang T, Wang J, Wang L, Wang S, Wang L, Ward M, Ward A, 
Watson D, Wefel J, Weiner M, Wenzel F, Wesnes K, Westaway S, Westlye LT, Wheland 
D, Whitcher B, White B, Whitlow C, Wilhelmsen K, Wilmot B, Wilson L, Wingo T, 
Wirth M, Wishart H, Wiste H, Wittemer E, Wolf H, Wolke I, Wolz R, Wong T, Wong 
K, Woo J, Woo E, Woods L, Worth A, Wu L, Wu X, Wu Y, Wyman B, Xie S, Xu S, Xu S, 
Xu Y, Xu J, Yamada T, Yamashita F, Yan Y, Yang Z, Yang JJ, Yang HD, Yang E, Yang 
CY, Yang E, Yang H, Yang W, Yassa M, Yatsubo S, Yavorsky C, Ye BS, Yee L, 
Yokoyama J, Yokoyama T, Young S, Younhyun J, Yu CQ, Yu P, Yuan Y, Yuen B, 
Yushkevich P, Zaborszky L, Zagorodnov V, Zahodne L, Zarei M, Zeimpekis K, 
Zeitzer J, Zelinski E, Zeskind B, Zhan S, Zhang Z, Zhang T, Zhang J, Zhang Z, 
Zhang X, Zhang Y, Zhang D, Zhang L, Zhang K, Zhang L, Zhang M, Zhang P, Zhao P, 
Zhao X, Zhijun Y, Zhou L, Zhou B, Zhou Y, Zhu L, Zhu Z, Zhu H, Zhu X, Ziegler G, 
Zilka S, Zisserman A, Zito G, Zito G, Zu C, Zulfigar A.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. 
jschott@dementia.ion.ucl.ac.uk

Defining cases and controls on the basis of biomarkers rather than clinical 
diagnosis may reduce sample sizes required for genetic studies. The aim of this 
study was to assess whether characterizing case/control status on the basis of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile would increase power to replicate known 
genetic associations for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Independent of clinical 
diagnosis, Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) subjects with 2 
CSF biomarkers for AD (Aβ1-42 < 192 pg/mL and tau phosphorylated at threonine 
181 (p-tau) > 23 pg/mL, "CSF-positive") were compared with those without CSF 
evidence for AD (Aβ1-42 > 192 pg/mL and 181-phosphorylated tau < 23 pg/mL, 
"CSF-negative"). Minor allele frequency (MAF) and odds ratios (ORs) between 
these 2 groups were calculated for 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
interest. Two hundred thirty-two individuals were CSF-positive and 94 
CSF-negative. There were no differences in age (74.7 ± 7.2 vs. 75.0 ± 6.5 years, 
p = 0.7), but significant differences in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
(25.9 ± 2.6 vs. 28.2 ± 1.7, p < 0.001) between the CSF-positive and CSF-negative 
groups. Significant differences in MAF (p < 0.05, uncorrected) were seen for CR1 
(rs1408077; OR, 1.59; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.01-2.49), PICALM 
(rs541458; OR, 0.68, 95% CI, 0.47-0.98), TOMM40 (rs2075650; OR, 4.30; 95% CI, 
2.61-7.06); and possession of 1 or more APOE ε4 alleles (OR, 9.84; 95% CI, 
5.48-17.67). These results suggest that using biomarkers of AD pathology to 
define case and control status may increase power in genetic association 
studies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.008
PMCID: PMC3150628
PMID: 21459483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The author reports no conflicts of 
interest.


170. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Jul;22(7):698-707. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.028. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Psychosis in Alzheimer's disease is associated with frontal metabolic impairment 
and accelerated decline in working memory: findings from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Koppel J(1), Sunday S(2), Goldberg TE(2), Davies P(2), Christen E(2), Greenwald 
BS(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Litwin Zucker Alzheimer's Research Center, Manhasset, NY. Electronic address: 
jkoppel@nshs.edu.
(2)Litwin Zucker Alzheimer's Research Center, Manhasset, NY.

OBJECTIVE: An ascendant body of evidence suggests that Alzheimer disease with 
psychosis (AD+P) is a distinct variant of illness with its own genetic diathesis 
and a unique clinical course. Impaired frontal lobe function has been previously 
implicated in AD+P. The current exploratory study, presented in two parts, 
evaluates both the regional brain metabolic and psychometric correlates of 
psychosis in a longitudinal sample of subjects with AD, made available by the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).
METHODS: In Part 1 of the study, 21 ADNI participants with AD who developed 
psychotic symptoms during the study but were not psychotic at baseline were 
matched with 21 participants with AD who never became psychotic during the study 
period, and mean brain [F(18)]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
(FDG-PET) Cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (CMRgl) by regions of interest 
(ROIs) were compared Additionally, 39 participants with active psychosis at the 
time of image acquisition were matched with 39 participants who were never 
psychotic during the study period, and mean brain FDG-PET CMRgl by sROI were 
compared. In Part 2 of the study, 354 ADNI participants with AD who were 
followed for 24 months with serial psychometric testing were identified, and 
cognitive performance and decline were evaluated for correlation with psychotic 
symptoms.
RESULTS: Part 1: There were no regional brain metabolic differences between 
those with AD destined to become psychotic and those who did not become 
psychotic. There was a significant reduction in mean orbitofrontal brain 
metabolism in those with active psychosis. Part 2: Over the course of study 
follow-up, psychosis was associated with accelerated decline in functional 
performance as measured by the Functional Assessment Questionnaire, the 
Mini-Mental State Examination, and Forward Digit Span.
CONCLUSION: In a sample drawn from the ADNI dataset, our exploratory FDG-PET 
findings and longitudinal cognitive outcomes support the hypofrontality model of 
AD+P. Focal frontal vulnerability may mediate the accelerated decline seen in 
AD+P.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.028
PMID: 23672944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. JAMA Neurol. 2016 Jun 1;73(6):721-32. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0580.

Association Between Anticholinergic Medication Use and Cognition, Brain 
Metabolism, and Brain Atrophy in Cognitively Normal Older Adults.

Risacher SL(1), McDonald BC(1), Tallman EF(1), West JD(1), Farlow MR(2), 
Unverzagt FW(3), Gao S(4), Boustani M(5), Crane PK(6), Petersen RC(7), Jack CR 
Jr(8), Jagust WJ(9), Aisen PS(10), Weiner MW(11), Saykin AJ(1); Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indiana University Health Neuroscience 
Center, Indianapolis2Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis.
(2)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis3Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(3)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis4Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(4)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis5Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis.
(5)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis6Indiana University Center for Aging Research, 
Indianapolis7Regenstrief Institute Inc, Indianapolis, Indiana8Eskenzai Health, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.
(7)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(8)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley.
(10)Alzheimer's Therapeutic Research Institute, University of Southern 
California, San Diego.
(11)Departments of Radiology, Medicine, and Psychiatry, University of 
California-San Francisco, San Francisco15Department of Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, San Francisco, California.

Comment in
    BMJ. 2016 Apr 18;353:i2220. doi: 10.1136/bmj.i2220.
    J Urol. 2016 Nov;196(5):1500. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2016.08.070.
    Evid Based Med. 2016 Dec;21(6):235. doi: 10.1136/ebmed-2016-110555.

IMPORTANCE: The use of anticholinergic (AC) medication is linked to cognitive 
impairment and an increased risk of dementia. To our knowledge, this is the 
first study to investigate the association between AC medication use and 
neuroimaging biomarkers of brain metabolism and atrophy as a proxy for 
understanding the underlying biology of the clinical effects of AC medications.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between AC medication use and cognition, 
glucose metabolism, and brain atrophy in cognitively normal older adults from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the Indiana Memory 
and Aging Study (IMAS).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The ADNI and IMAS are longitudinal studies 
with cognitive, neuroimaging, and other data collected at regular intervals in 
clinical and academic research settings. For the participants in the ADNI, 
visits are repeated 3, 6, and 12 months after the baseline visit and then 
annually. For the participants in the IMAS, visits are repeated every 18 months 
after the baseline visit (402 cognitively normal older adults in the ADNI and 49 
cognitively normal older adults in the IMAS were included in the present 
analysis). Participants were either taking (hereafter referred to as the AC+ 
participants [52 from the ADNI and 8 from the IMAS]) or not taking (hereafter 
referred to as the AC- participants [350 from the ADNI and 41 from the IMAS]) at 
least 1 medication with medium or high AC activity. Data analysis for this study 
was performed in November 2015.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Cognitive scores, mean fludeoxyglucose F 18 
standardized uptake value ratio (participants from the ADNI only), and brain 
atrophy measures from structural magnetic resonance imaging were compared 
between AC+ participants and AC- participants after adjusting for potential 
confounders. The total AC burden score was calculated and was related to target 
measures. The association of AC use and longitudinal clinical decline (mean [SD] 
follow-up period, 32.1 [24.7] months [range, 6-108 months]) was examined using 
Cox regression.
RESULTS: The 52 AC+ participants (mean [SD] age, 73.3 [6.6] years) from the ADNI 
showed lower mean scores on Weschler Memory Scale-Revised Logical Memory 
Immediate Recall (raw mean scores: 13.27 for AC+ participants and 14.16 for AC- 
participants; P = .04) and the Trail Making Test Part B (raw mean scores: 97.85 
seconds for AC+ participants and 82.61 seconds for AC- participants; P = .04) 
and a lower executive function composite score (raw mean scores: 0.58 for AC+ 
participants and 0.78 for AC- participants; P = .04) than the 350 AC- 
participants (mean [SD] age, 73.3 [5.8] years) from the ADNI. Reduced total 
cortical volume and temporal lobe cortical thickness and greater lateral 
ventricle and inferior lateral ventricle volumes were seen in the AC+ 
participants relative to the AC- participants.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: The use of AC medication was associated with 
increased brain atrophy and dysfunction and clinical decline. Thus, use of AC 
medication among older adults should likely be discouraged if alternative 
therapies are available.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.0580
PMCID: PMC5029278
PMID: 27088965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: Dr Farlow reports grant research 
support from Accera, Biogen, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Genentech, Roche, Lundbeck, Chase 
Pharmaceuticals, and Boehringer-Ingelheim and being a consultant for or on the 
advisory or data and safety monitoring boards of Accera, Alltech, Avanir, 
Biogen, Eisai Medical Research Inc, FORUM Pharmaceuticals, Genentech Inc, 
Grifols, Helicon Inc Research, Lundbeck, Medavante, Medivation Inc, Merck and 
Company Inc, Medtronic, Neurotrope Biosciences, Novartis, Pfizer, QR Pharma, 
Axovant Sciences Inc, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis, Schering-Plough, Takeda, Toyama 
Pharmaceutical, Pharm, Eli Lilly and Company, and UCB Pharma. Dr Petersen serves 
on the advisory boards of Pfizer Inc and Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy and is 
a consultant for Roche Incorporated, Merck, Genentech, and Biogen. He receives 
support from the National Institute on Aging (grants U01-AG006786, 
P50-AGG016574, R01-AG011378, and U01-AG024904) and publishing royalties from 
Oxford University Press. Dr Jack serves as a consultant for Eli Lilly and 
Company and receives research support from the National Institute on Aging 
(grants R01 AG11378 and R01 AG041851) and the Alexander Family Alzheimer’s 
Disease Research Professorship of the Mayo Foundation. Dr Jagust serves on the 
scientific advisory boards of Genentech and Banner/ Genentech and was a 
consultant for Synarc, Siemens Medical, Genentech, F. Hoffman–La Roche, and 
Novartis. He receives research support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, the 
Rainwater Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (grants 
AG034570, AG025303, AG044292, AG012345, AG021028, AG031563, AG019724, AG030048, 
AG032306, and AG024904). Dr Aisen serves on the scientific advisory boards of 
Novartis and Biogen and has been a consultant for Elan Corporation, Wyeth, Eisai 
Inc, Schering-Plough Corp, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, Roche, 
Amgen, Genentech Inc, Abbott, Pfizer Inc, Novartis, Bayer, Medivation Inc, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Astellas, Bainippon, Biomarin, Solvay, Ostuka, AstraZeneca, and 
Janssen. He receives research support from Baxter, Pfizer, Janssen, and Eli 
Lilly and Company, as well as from the National Institute on Aging (grants 
U01-AG10483, U01 AG024904, R01 AG030048, and R01 AG16381). Dr Weiner serves on 
the scientific advisory boards for Pfizer, BOLT International, Neurotrope 
Bioscience, Eli Lilly and Company, the University of Pennsylvania’s Neuroscience 
of Behavior Initiative, the National Brain Research Centre, India, and the ADNI 
and is a consultant for Synarc, Pfizer, Janssen, KLJ Associates, Easton 
Associates, Harvard University, the University of California, Los Angeles 
(UCLA), the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, 
Clearview Healthcare Partners, Perceptive Informatics, Smartfish AS, Decision 
Resources Inc, Neurotrope Bioscience, Araclon, Merck, Defined Health, and 
Genentech. He receives research support from Avid Radiopharmceuticals, Eli Lilly 
and Company, the NIH, the US Department of Defense, and the Veterans 
Administration. He also has received travel funding or speaker honoraria from 
Pfizer, Paul Sabatier University, the MCI Group France, eDreams, the 
Neuroscience School of Advanced Studies, Danone Trading, BV, CTAD ANT Congrès, 
Kenes International, the Aging and Disability Resource Center, UCLA, the 
University of California, San Diego, the Sanofi-Aventis Group, University Center 
Hospital, Toulouse, Araclon, AC Immune, Eli Lilly and Company, the New York 
Academy of Sciences, the National Brain Research Center, Indiana for Johns 
Hopkins Medicine, the Consortium for Multiple Sclerosis Centers, Northwestern 
University, and the University of Pennsylvania. Dr Saykin serves on scientific 
advisory boards of Siemens Healthcare and Eli Lilly and Company and was a 
consultant for Baxter Bioscience, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Pfizer Inc, Siemens Healthcare, Dartmouth Medical School, the University of 
Michigan, the University of Vermont, Vanderbilt University, and Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital/ Massachusetts General Hospital. He has received research 
support from Siemens Medical Solutions, Welch Allyn Inc, the Foundation for the 
NIH, and the NIH (grants R01 AG19771, R01 CA101318, R01 LM011360, RC2 AG036535, 
P30 AG10133, and U01 AG032984). He has also received travel support and/or 
speaker honoraria from Siemens Healthcare. No other disclosures are reported.


172. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019 Jan 31;11(1):14. doi: 10.1186/s13195-019-0471-6.

Inferior and medial temporal tau and cortical amyloid are associated with daily 
functional impairment in Alzheimer's disease.

Halawa OA(1), Gatchel JR(1)(2)(3), Amariglio RE(1)(4)(5)(6)(7), Rentz 
DM(1)(4)(5)(6)(7), Sperling RA(1)(4)(5)(6), Johnson KA(1)(8)(5)(6), Marshall 
GA(9)(10)(11)(12); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA.
(3)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, 02478, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA.
(5)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 60 
Fenwood Road, 9016P, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, 
USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, 
USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA.
(9)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. gamarshall@partners.org.
(10)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, 
USA. gamarshall@partners.org.
(11)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
60 Fenwood Road, 9016P, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. gamarshall@partners.org.
(12)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, 
USA. gamarshall@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: A decline in instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) 
correlates with the progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia and has been associated with frontal and 
parietal hypometabolism, lower cerebrospinal fluid amyloid β1-42, and inferior 
temporal cortical thinning. Identifying the underlying biomarkers of functional 
decline will allow for the early identification of individuals at risk of 
disease progression.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between IADL impairment and in vivo 
regional cerebral tau and cortical amyloid deposition across clinically normal 
(CN) elderly, MCI, and AD dementia.
METHODS: Fifty-one CN elderly, 30 MCI, and 9 AD dementia participants of the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) underwent assessment of 
regional tau deposition with flortaucipir (FTP) positron emission tomography 
(PET). An aggregate of cortical amyloid burden was assessed by florbetapir PET. 
IADL were assessed using the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ). Tau 
regions with unadjusted correlations of p ≤ 0.006 (Bonferroni correction) with 
FAQ were used to evaluate the cross-sectional association between FAQ (dependent 
variable) and regional cerebral tau deposition, amyloid burden, and tau-amyloid 
interaction in separate general linear regression models with backward 
elimination. Covariates included age, American National Adult Reading Test 
(AMNART) intelligence quotient (IQ), and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) total learning.
RESULTS: Unadjusted correlations between FAQ and tau in the entorhinal cortex 
(EC) and inferior temporal cortex (IT) survived Bonferroni correction. FAQ was 
associated with the tau-amyloid interaction, such that in participants with 
greater amyloid burden, greater IADL impairment was associated with greater 
regional tau (EC tau × amyloid: partial r (pr) = 0.47, p < 0.001; IT tau × 
amyloid: pr = 0.54, p < 0.001). Significant associations were found when these 
regression models were repeated in symptomatic participants alone but not among 
CN participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Greater medial and inferior temporal tau and cortical amyloid 
burden were associated with greater IADL impairment in AD. Further elucidation 
of the biomarkers underlying the functional decline will allow for the early 
identification of individual at risk of disease progression.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-019-0471-6
PMCID: PMC6357436
PMID: 30704519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
Partners Healthcare Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved the study, as did 
the IRB of each Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) site. Written 
informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to initiation of any 
study procedures in accordance with IRB guidelines. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors have received research salary 
support from Eisai Inc. (GAM), Eli Lilly and Company (GAM, KAJ, RAS), Janssen 
Alzheimer Immunotherapy (DMR, GAM, KAJ, RAS), Avid Radiopharmaceuticals (KAJ, 
RAS), Navidea (KAJ), and Pfizer (KAJ). Additionally, DMR has served as a 
consultant for Eli Lilly, Neurotrack, Biogen, and Lundbeck Pharmaceuticals; GAM 
has served as a consultant for Grifols Shared Services North America, Inc. and 
Pifzer; KAJ has served as a consultant for Bayer, GE Healthcare, Janssen 
Alzheimer’s Immunotherapy, Siemens Medical Solutions, Genzyme, Novartis, Biogen, 
Roche, ISIS Pharma, AZTherapy, GEHC, Lundberg, and Abbvie; and RAS has served as 
a consultant for AbbVie, Biogen, Bracket, Genentech, Lundbeck, Roche, and 
Sanofi. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


173. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities. 2024 Feb;11(1):81-91. doi: 
10.1007/s40615-022-01499-w. Epub 2022 Dec 28.

Intersectional Effects of Race and Educational Attainment on Memory Function of 
Middle-Aged and Older Adults With Alzheimer's Disease.

Rahmani A(1), Najand B(1), Sonnega A(2), Akhlaghipour G(1), Mendez MF(3)(4), 
Assari S(5)(6)(7); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Marginalized-Related Diminished Returns (MDRs) Research Center, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California 
Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Marginalized-Related Diminished Returns (MDRs) Research Center, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA. assari@umich.edu.
(6)Department of Family Medicine, Charles R Drew University of Medicine and 
Science, Los Angeles, CA, USA. assari@umich.edu.
(7)Department of Urban Public Health, Charles R Drew University of Medicine and 
Science, Los Angeles, CA, USA. assari@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: High educational attainment may protect individuals, particularly 
middle-aged and older adults, against a wide range of health risks, including 
memory decline with age; however, this protection is less clear in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). In addition, this effect may differ across racial 
groups. According to the Marginalized-Related Diminished Return (MDR) theory, 
for example, the protective effect of high educational attainment on mental and 
physical health shows a weaker protective effect for racial minority groups, 
particularly Black people compared to White individuals.
OBJECTIVES: This longitudinal study used data of middle-aged and older adults 
with AD with two aims: first, to test the association between educational 
attainment and memory, and second, to explore racial differences in this 
association in the USA.
METHODS: Data came from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
study. The total sample was 1673 American middle-aged and older adults. The 
independent variable was educational attainment measured as years of education. 
The main outcome was memory operationalized as Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) Verbal Forgetting percentage (VF%). Age, gender, and follow-up duration 
were covariates. Race was the effect modifier. Linear regression model was 
utilized to analyze the data.
RESULTS: Of all participants, 68 (4.1%) were Black, and the remaining were 
White, with a mean age of 75 years old. In the pooled sample, educational 
attainment did not show a significant association with memory, independent of 
confounders. Educational attainment showed a significant interaction with race 
on memory, with higher educational attainment having a different effect on 
memory in White patients compared to Black patients.
CONCLUSION: The effect of higher educational attainment on memory differs for 
Black patients with AD compared to White patients. To prevent cognitive 
disparities by race, we need to go beyond racial inequality in access to 
resources (e.g., education) and minimize diminished returns of educational 
attainment for racial minorities. To tackle health inequalities, social policies 
should not be limited to equalizing socioeconomic status but also help minority 
groups leverage their available resources, such as educational attainment, and 
secure tangible outcomes.

© 2022. W. Montague Cobb-NMA Health Institute.

DOI: 10.1007/s40615-022-01499-w
PMID: 36576695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44(1):79-92. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140942.

Generalizability of the disease state index prediction model for identifying 
patients progressing from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Hall A(1), Muñoz-Ruiz M(2), Mattila J(3), Koikkalainen J(3), Tsolaki M(4), 
Mecocci P(5), Kloszewska I(6), Vellas B(7), Lovestone S(8), Visser PJ(9), 
Lötjonen J(3), Soininen H(2); Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; 
AddNeuroMed consortium; DESCRIPA and Kuopio L-MCI.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Neurology, University of Eastern Finland, 
Kuopio, Finland Department of Neurology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, 
Finland.
(3)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Memory and Dementia Centre, "G 
Papanicolaou" General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(5)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, 
Italy.
(6)Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(7)UMR INSERM, University of Toulouse, France.
(8)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), London, UK King's College 
London, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.
(9)VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Maastricht 
University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The Disease State Index (DSI) prediction model measures the 
similarity of patient data to diagnosed stable and progressive mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) cases to identify patients who are progressing to Alzheimer's 
disease.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated how well the DSI generalizes across four different 
cohorts: DESCRIPA, ADNI, AddNeuroMed, and the Kuopio MCI study.
METHODS: The accuracy of the DSI in predicting progression was examined for each 
cohort separately using 10 × 10-fold cross-validation and for inter-cohort 
validation using each cohort as a test set for the model built from the other 
independent cohorts using bootstrapping with 10 repetitions. Altogether 875 
subjects were included in the analysis. The analyzed data included a 
comprehensive set of age and gender corrected magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
features from hippocampal volumetry, multi-template tensor-based morphometry, 
and voxel-based morphometry as well as Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
APOE genotype, and additional cohort specific data from neuropsychological tests 
and cerebrospinal fluid measurements (CSF).
RESULTS: The DSI model was used to classify the patients into stable and 
progressive MCI cases. AddNeuroMed had the highest classification results of the 
cohorts, while ADNI and Kuopio MCI exhibited the lowest values. The MRI features 
alone achieved a good classification performance for all cohorts. For ADNI and 
DESCRIPA, adding MMSE, APOE genotype, CSF, and neuropsychological data improved 
the results.
CONCLUSIONS: The results reveal that the prediction performance of the combined 
cohort is close to the average of the individual cohorts. It is feasible to use 
different cohorts as training sets for the DSI, if they are sufficiently 
similar.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-140942
PMID: 25201784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2014;2014:934-7. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2014.6943745.

Distance-informed metric learning for Alzheimer's disease staging.

Shi B, Wang Z, Liu J.

Identifying intermediate biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is of great 
importance for diagnosis and prognosis of the disease. In this study, we develop 
a new AD staging method to classify patients into Normal Controls (NC), Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and AD groups. Our solution employs a novel metric 
learning technique that improves classification rates through the guidance of 
some weak supervisory information in AD progression. More specifically, those 
information are in the form of pairwise constraints that specify the relative 
Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score disparity of two subjects, depending 
on whether they are in the same group or not. With the imposed constraints, the 
common knowledge that MCI generally sits in between of NC and AD can be 
integrated into the classification distance metric. Subjects from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort (ADNI; 56 AD, 104 MCI, 161 
controls) were used to demonstrate the improvements made comparing with two 
state-of-the-art metric learning solutions: large margin nearest neighbors 
(LMNN) and relevant component analysis (RCA).

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.6943745
PMID: 25570113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Eur J Neurosci. 2022 Dec;56(12):6227-6238. doi: 10.1111/ejn.15860. Epub 2022 Nov 
22.

Altered functional connectivity pattern of hippocampal subfields in individuals 
with objectively-defined subtle cognitive decline and its association with 
cognition and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers.

Qiu T(1), Zeng Q(2), Zhang Y(1), Luo X(2), Xu X(2), Li X(1), Shen Z(2), Li K(2), 
Wang C(2), Huang P(2), Zhang M(2), Dai S(1), Xie F(3); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Equipment and Medical Engineering, Linyi People's Hospital, 
Linyi, China.

Recent studies have shown that in the preclinical phase of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), subtle cognitive changes can be detected using sensitive 
neuropsychological measures, and have proposed the concept of 
objectively-defined subtle cognitive decline (Obj-SCD). We aimed to assess the 
functional alteration of hippocampal subfields in individuals with Obj-SCD and 
its association with cognition and pathological biomarkers. Forty-two 
participants with cognitively normal (CN), 29 with Obj-SCD, and 55 with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) were retrospectively collected from the ADNI 
database. Neuropsychological performance, functional MRI, and cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) data were obtained. We calculated the seed-based functional 
connectivity (FC) of hippocampal subfields (cornu ammonis1 [CA1], CA2/3/dentate 
gyrus [DG], and subiculum) with whole-brain voxels. Additionally, we analyzed 
the correlation between FC values of significantly altered regions and 
neuropsychological performance and CSF biomarkers. The Obj-SCD group showed 
lower FC between left CA1-CA2/3/DG and right thalamus and higher FC between 
right subiculum and right superior parietal gyrus (SPG) compared with the CN and 
MCI groups. In the Obj-SCD group, FC values between left CA2/3/DG and right 
thalamus were positively associated with Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) 
recognition (r = 0.395, p = 0.046) and CSF Aβ1-42 levels (r = 0.466, p = 0.019), 
and FC values between left CA1 and right thalamus were positively correlated 
with CSF Aβ1-42 levels (r = 0.530, p = 0.006). Taken together, dysfunction in 
CA1-CA2/3/DG subregions suggests subtle cognitive impairment and AD-specific 
pathological changes in individuals with Obj-SCD. Additionally, increased 
subiculum connectivity may indicate early functional compensation for subtle 
cognitive changes.

© 2022 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience published by Federation of 
European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.15860
PMCID: PMC10100315
PMID: 36342704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


177. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;91(2):895-909. doi: 10.3233/JAD-220891.

Hierarchical Two-Stage Cost-Sensitive Clinical Decision Support System for 
Screening Prodromal Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias.

Kleiman MJ(1), Ariko T(2), Galvin JE(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Center for Brain Health, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Boca Raton, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The detection of subtle cognitive impairment in a clinical setting 
is difficult. Because time is a key factor in small clinics and research sites, 
the brief cognitive assessments that are relied upon often misclassify patients 
with very mild impairment as normal.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we seek to identify a parsimonious screening tool in 
one stage, followed by additional assessments in an optional second stage if 
additional specificity is desired, tested using a machine learning algorithm 
capable of being integrated into a clinical decision support system.
METHODS: The best primary stage incorporated measures of short-term memory, 
executive and visuospatial functioning, and self-reported memory and daily 
living questions, with a total time of 5 minutes. The best secondary stage 
incorporated a measure of neurobiology as well as additional cognitive 
assessment and brief informant report questionnaires, totaling 30 minutes 
including delayed recall. Combined performance was evaluated using 25 sets of 
models, trained on 1,181 ADNI participants and tested on 127 patients from a 
memory clinic.
RESULTS: The 5-minute primary stage was highly sensitive (96.5%) but lacked 
specificity (34.1%), with an AUC of 87.5% and diagnostic odds ratio of 14.3. The 
optional secondary stage increased specificity to 58.6%, resulting in an overall 
AUC of 89.7% using the best model combination of logistic regression and 
gradient-boosted machine.
CONCLUSION: The primary stage is brief and effective at screening, with the 
optional two-stage technique further increasing specificity. The hierarchical 
two-stage technique exhibited similar accuracy but with reduced costs compared 
to the more common single-stage paradigm.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-220891
PMCID: PMC10515190
PMID: 36502329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Neuroimage. 2012 Jan 16;59(2):895-907. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.069. 
Epub 2011 Oct 4.

Multi-modal multi-task learning for joint prediction of multiple regression and 
classification variables in Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang D(1), Shen D; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and BRIC, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599, USA. dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn

Erratum in
    Neuroimage. 2012 Sep;62(3):2179.

Many machine learning and pattern classification methods have been applied to 
the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and its prodromal stage, i.e., mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI). Recently, rather than predicting categorical 
variables as in classification, several pattern regression methods have also 
been used to estimate continuous clinical variables from brain images. However, 
most existing regression methods focus on estimating multiple clinical variables 
separately and thus cannot utilize the intrinsic useful correlation information 
among different clinical variables. On the other hand, in those regression 
methods, only a single modality of data (usually only the structural MRI) is 
often used, without considering the complementary information that can be 
provided by different modalities. In this paper, we propose a general 
methodology, namely multi-modal multi-task (M3T) learning, to jointly predict 
multiple variables from multi-modal data. Here, the variables include not only 
the clinical variables used for regression but also the categorical variable 
used for classification, with different tasks corresponding to prediction of 
different variables. Specifically, our method contains two key components, i.e., 
(1) a multi-task feature selection which selects the common subset of relevant 
features for multiple variables from each modality, and (2) a multi-modal 
support vector machine which fuses the above-selected features from all 
modalities to predict multiple (regression and classification) variables. To 
validate our method, we perform two sets of experiments on ADNI baseline MRI, 
FDG-PET, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) data from 45 AD patients, 91 MCI 
patients, and 50 healthy controls (HC). In the first set of experiments, we 
estimate two clinical variables such as Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog), as well as 
one categorical variable (with value of 'AD', 'MCI' or 'HC'), from the baseline 
MRI, FDG-PET, and CSF data. In the second set of experiments, we predict the 
2-year changes of MMSE and ADAS-Cog scores and also the conversion of MCI to AD 
from the baseline MRI, FDG-PET, and CSF data. The results on both sets of 
experiments demonstrate that our proposed M3T learning scheme can achieve better 
performance on both regression and classification tasks than the conventional 
learning methods.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.069
PMCID: PMC3230721
PMID: 21992749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Brain Imaging Behav. 2012 Dec;6(4):502-16. doi: 10.1007/s11682-012-9186-z.

Development and assessment of a composite score for memory in the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Crane PK(1), Carle A, Gibbons LE, Insel P, Mackin RS, Gross A, Jones RN, 
Mukherjee S, Curtis SM, Harvey D, Weiner M, Mungas D; Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Liu 
E, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Gamst A, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Beckett L, Harvey D, Gamst A, Donohue M, Kornak 
J, Jack CR Jr, Dale A, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
Alexander G, DeCarli C, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen 
K, Mathis C, Morris J, Cairns NJ, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Shaw L, Lee 
VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen 
L, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, Dolen 
S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, 
Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern 
Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, Ances B, Carroll M, Leon S, Mintun MA, 
Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Romirowsky A, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
Kielb S, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella 
JR, Coleman R, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, 
Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino 
KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews 
D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Lu PH, 
Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow MR, 
Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, 
Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, 
Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh M, Belden C, 
Jacobson S, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Bwayo SK, Lerner A, Hudson L, Ogrocki P, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, 
Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Schwartz ES, 
Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Flynn Longmire 
C, Spicer K, Finger E, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D.

Author information:
(1)Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Box 359780, 325 Ninth 
Avenue, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. pcrane@u.washington.edu

We sought to develop and evaluate a composite memory score from the 
neuropsychological battery used in the Alzheimer's Disease (AD) Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI). We used modern psychometric approaches to analyze 
longitudinal Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT, 2 versions), AD 
Assessment Schedule - Cognition (ADAS-Cog, 3 versions), Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE), and Logical Memory data to develop ADNI-Mem, a composite 
memory score. We compared RAVLT and ADAS-Cog versions, and compared ADNI-Mem to 
RAVLT recall sum scores, four ADAS-Cog-derived scores, the MMSE, and the 
Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes. We evaluated rates of decline in normal 
cognition, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD, ability to predict 
conversion from MCI to AD, strength of association with selected imaging 
parameters, and ability to differentiate rates of decline between participants 
with and without AD cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signatures. The second version of 
the RAVLT was harder than the first. The ADAS-Cog versions were of similar 
difficulty. ADNI-Mem was slightly better at detecting change than total RAVLT 
recall scores. It was as good as or better than all of the other scores at 
predicting conversion from MCI to AD. It was associated with all our selected 
imaging parameters for people with MCI and AD. Participants with MCI with an AD 
CSF signature had somewhat more rapid decline than did those without. This paper 
illustrates appropriate methods for addressing the different versions of word 
lists, and demonstrates the additional power to be gleaned with a 
psychometrically sound composite memory score.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-012-9186-z
PMCID: PMC3806057
PMID: 22782295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Comput Biol Med. 2023 Oct;165:107396. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107396. 
Epub 2023 Aug 26.

DE-JANet: A unified network based on dual encoder and joint attention for 
Alzheimer's disease classification using multi-modal data.

Dai Y(1), Zou B(1), Zhu C(2), Li Y(1), Chen Z(1), Ji Z(1), Kui X(3), Zhang W(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China; Hunan Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and 
Intelligent Medicine, Changsha, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China; Hunan Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and 
Intelligent Medicine, Changsha, China. Electronic address: anandawork@126.com.
(3)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(4)Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI), which can reflect cerebral 
atrophy, plays an important role in the early detection of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). However, the information provided by analyzing only the morphological 
changes in sMRI is relatively limited, and the assessment of the atrophy degree 
is subjective. Therefore, it is meaningful to combine sMRI with other clinical 
information to acquire complementary diagnosis information and achieve a more 
accurate classification of AD. Nevertheless, how to fuse these multi-modal data 
effectively is still challenging. In this paper, we propose DE-JANet, a unified 
AD classification network that integrates image data sMRI with non-image 
clinical data, such as age and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score, for 
more effective multi-modal analysis. DE-JANet consists of three key components: 
(1) a dual encoder module for extracting low-level features from the image and 
non-image data according to specific encoding regularity, (2) a joint attention 
module for fusing multi-modal features, and (3) a token classification module 
for performing AD-related classification according to the fused multi-modal 
features. Our DE-JANet is evaluated on the ADNI dataset, with a mean accuracy of 
0.9722 and 0.9538 for AD classification and mild cognition impairment (MCI) 
classification, respectively, which is superior to existing methods and 
indicates advanced performance on AD-related diagnosis tasks.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.107396
PMID: 37703717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


181. Brain Behav. 2018 Aug;8(8):e01020. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1020. Epub 2018 Jun 22.

The association between "Brain-Age Score" (BAS) and traditional 
neuropsychological screening tools in Alzheimer's disease.

Beheshti I(1), Maikusa N(1), Matsuda H(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Brain Imaging Center, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: We present the Brain-Age Score (BAS) as a magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI)-based index for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We developed a fully 
automated framework for estimating the BAS in healthy controls (HCs) and 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or AD, using MRI scans.
METHODS: We trained the proposed framework using 385 HCs from the IXI and OASIS 
datasets and evaluated 146 HCs, 102 stable-MCI (sMCI), 112 progressive-MCI 
(pMCI), and 147 AD patients from the J-ADNI dataset. We used a correlation test 
to determine the association between the BAS and four traditional screening 
tools of AD: the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Ratio 
(CDR), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Score (ADAS), and Functional Assessment 
Questionnaire (FAQ). Furthermore, we assessed the association between BAS and 
anatomical MRI measurements: the normalized gray matter (nGM), normalized white 
matter (nWM), normalized cerebrospinal fluid (nCSF), mean cortical thickness as 
well as hippocampus volume.
RESULTS: The correlation results demonstrated that the BAS is in line with 
traditional screening tools of AD (i.e., the MMSE, CDR, ADAS, and FAQ scores) as 
well as anatomical MRI measurements (i.e., nGM, nCSF, mean cortical thickness, 
and hippocampus volume).
DISCUSSION: The BAS may be useful for diagnosing the brain atrophy level and can 
be a reliable automated index for clinical applications and neuropsychological 
screening tools.

© 2018 National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry. Brain and Behavior published 
by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1020
PMCID: PMC6085898
PMID: 29931756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;57(2):447-459. doi: 10.3233/JAD-161223.

Cognitive Composites Domain Scores Related to Neuroimaging Biomarkers within 
Probable-Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment-Storage Subtype.

Espinosa A(1), Alegret M(1), Pesini P(2), Valero S(1)(3), Lafuente A(1), Buendía 
M(1), San José I(2), Ibarria M(1), Tejero MA(4), Giménez J(4), Ruiz S(1), 
Hernández I(1), Pujadas F(5), Martínez-Lage P(6), Munuera J(7), Arbizu J(8), 
Tárraga L(1), Hendrix SB(9), Ruiz A(1), Becker JT(10), Landau SM(11), 
Sotolongo-Grau O(1), Sarasa M(2), Boada M(1); AB255 Study Group; Alzheimer’s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Research Center and Memory Clinic, Fundació ACE, Institut Català de 
Neurociències Aplicades, Alzheimer Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Araclon Biotech S.L., Zaragoza, Spain.
(3)Deparment of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, CIBERSAM, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Clínica Corachán, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Fundación CITA, Centro de Investigación y Terapias Avanzadas, Alzheimer, San 
Sebastián, Spain.
(7)Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Unitat RM Badalona, Institut de 
diagnòstic per la imatge, Badalona, Spain.
(8)Clínica Universitaria de Pamplona, Pamplona, Spain.
(9)Pentara Corporation, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(10)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(11)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.

The probable-amnestic (Pr-a) mild cognitive impairment (MCI)-storage subtype is 
a phenotype with 8.5 times more risk of conversion to dementia, mainly 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), than the possible non-amnestic (Pss-na) MCI. The aim 
of this study was to find the optimized cognitive composites (CCs) domain scores 
most related to neuroimaging biomarkers within Pr-aMCI-storage subtype patients. 
The Fundació ACE (ACE) study with 20 Pr-aMCI-storage subtype subjects (MCI) were 
analyzed. All subjects underwent a neuropsychological assessment, a structural 
MRI, FDG-PET, and PIB-PET. The adjusted hippocampal volume (aHV) on MRI, the 
standard uptake value ratio (SUVR) on FDG-PET and PIB-PET SUVR measures were 
analyzed. The construction of the CCs domain scores, and the aHV on MRI and 
FDG-PET SUVR measures, were replicated in the parental AB255 study database 
(n = 133 MCI). Partial correlations adjusted by age, gender, and education were 
calculated with the associated p-value among every CC domain score and the 
neuroimaging biomarkers. The results were replicated in the "MCI due to AD" with 
memory storage impairments from ADNI. Delayed Recall CC domain score was 
significantly correlated with PIB-PET SUVR (β= -0.61, p = 0.003) in the ACE 
study and also with aHV on MRI (β= 0.27, p = 0.01) and FDG-PET SUVR (β= 0.27, 
p = 0.01) in the AB255 study. After a median survival time of 20.6 months, 85% 
from the ACE MCI converted to AD. The replication of our results in the ADNI 
dataset also confirmed our findings. Delayed Recall is the CC domain score best 
correlated with neuroimaging biomarkers associated with prodromal AD diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-161223
PMCID: PMC5366247
PMID: 28269787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2024 Feb 1;10(1):e12442. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12442. 
eCollection 2024 Jan-Mar.

Longitudinal associations of apathy and regional tau in mild cognitive 
impairment and dementia: Findings from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Premnath PY(1), Locascio JJ(2)(3), Mimmack KJ(2), Gonzalez C(4), Properzi 
MJ(2)(5), Udeogu O(2), Rosenberg PB(6), Marshall GA(2)(3)(7)(8), Gatchel 
JR(9)(10)(11)(12); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology The Graduate Center, City University of New York New 
York New York USA.
(2)Department of Neurology Massachusetts General Hospital Boston Massachusetts 
USA.
(3)Department of Neurology Harvard Medical School Boston Massachusetts USA.
(4)Department of Psychology Illinois Institute of Technology Chicago Illinois 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging 
Charlestown Massachusetts USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine Baltimore Maryland USA.
(7)Department of Neurology Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston Massachusetts 
USA.
(8)Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment Brigham and Women's Hospital 
Boston Massachusetts USA.
(9)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry McLean Hospital Belmont Massachusetts USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Baylor College of Medicine 
Houston Texas USA.
(11)Department of Veterans Affairs Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center Houston 
Texas USA.
(12)Department of Psychiatry Harvard Medical School Boston Massachusetts USA.

INTRODUCTION: It is important to study apathy in Alzheimer's disease (AD) to 
better understand its underlying neurobiology and develop effective 
interventions. In the current study, we sought to examine the relationships 
between longitudinal apathy and regional tau burden in cognitively impaired 
older adults from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database.
METHODS: Three hundred and nineteen ADNI participants with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) or AD dementia underwent flortaucipir (FTP) tau positron 
emission tomography (PET) imaging and clinical assessment with the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) annually. Longitudinal NPI Apathy (NPI-A) 
scores were examined in relation to baseline tau PET signal in three a priori 
selected regions implicated in AD and AD-related apathy (supramarginal gyrus, 
entorhinal cortex [EC] and rostral anterior cingulate cortex [rACC]). Secondary 
models were adjusted for global cognition (Mini-Mental State Examination score) 
and cortical amyloid (florbetapir PET).
RESULTS: Higher baseline supramarginal gyrus and EC tau burden were each 
significantly associated with greater NPI-A over time, while rACC tau was 
associated with higher NPI-A but did not predict its trajectory over time. These 
results were retained for supramarginal and EC tau after adjusting models for 
global cognition and cortical amyloid.
DISCUSSION: Our findings suggest that baseline in vivo tau burden in parietal 
and temporal brain regions affected in AD, and less so in a medial frontal 
region involved in motivational control, is associated with increasing apathy 
over time in older adults with MCI and AD dementia. Future work studying 
emergent apathy in relation to not only core AD pathology but also circuit level 
dysfunction may provide additional insight into the neurobiology of apathy in AD 
and opportunities for intervention.
HIGHLIGHTS: Tau (Flortaucipir PET) in regions implicated in AD was associated 
with increasing apathy over timeCortical amyloid was also found to be a robust 
predictor of the trajectory of apathyEvidence of synergy between regional tau 
and amyloid in overall higher levels of apathy.

© 2024 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12442
PMCID: PMC10865481
PMID: 38356477

Conflict of interest statement: P.Y.P., C.G., K.J.M., O.U., M.P., and J.L. have 
nothing to disclose. J.R.G. has received past research support from Merck. 
G.A.M. has received research salary support from Eisai Inc., Eli Lilly and 
Company, and Genentech. P.B.R. has received research support from Lilly and 
Eisai, consulting fees from Acadia, Biogen, ExpertConnect, G.L.G., H.M.P. 
Global, Leerink, Lundbeck, Medalink, MEDACorp, Medscape, Neurology Week, Novo 
Nordisk, Noble Insights, and Two Labs, and serves on a DSMB for Synaptogenix. 
Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.


184. Neuroimage Clin. 2014 Jan 4;4:461-72. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.12.012. 
eCollection 2014.

ApoE4 effects on automated diagnostic classifiers for mild cognitive impairment 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Apostolova LG(1), Hwang KS(1), Kohannim O(2), Avila D(1), Elashoff D(3), Jack CR 
Jr(4), Shaw L(5), Trojanowski JQ(5), Weiner MW(6), Thompson PM(2); Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Imaging genetics Center, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine Statistics Core, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; 
Department of Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Biomarkers are the only feasible way to detect and monitor presymptomatic 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). No single biomarker can predict future cognitive 
decline with an acceptable level of accuracy. In addition to designing powerful 
multimodal diagnostic platforms, a careful investigation of the major sources of 
disease heterogeneity and their influence on biomarker changes is needed. Here 
we investigated the accuracy of a novel multimodal biomarker classifier for 
differentiating cognitively normal (NC), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD 
subjects with and without stratification by ApoE4 genotype. 111 NC, 182 MCI and 
95 AD ADNI participants provided both structural MRI and CSF data at baseline. 
We used an automated machine-learning classifier to test the ability of 
hippocampal volume and CSF Aβ, t-tau and p-tau levels, both separately and in 
combination, to differentiate NC, MCI and AD subjects, and predict conversion. 
We hypothesized that the combined hippocampal/CSF biomarker classifier model 
would achieve the highest accuracy in differentiating between the three 
diagnostic groups and that ApoE4 genotype will affect both diagnostic accuracy 
and biomarker selection. The combined hippocampal/CSF classifier performed 
better than hippocampus-only classifier in differentiating NC from MCI and NC 
from AD. It also outperformed the CSF-only classifier in differentiating NC vs. 
AD. Our amyloid marker played a role in discriminating NC from MCI or AD but not 
for MCI vs. AD. Neurodegenerative markers contributed to accurate discrimination 
of AD from NC and MCI but not NC from MCI. Classifiers predicting MCI conversion 
performed well only after ApoE4 stratification. Hippocampal volume and sex 
achieved AUC = 0.68 for predicting conversion in the ApoE4-positive MCI, while 
CSF p-tau, education and sex achieved AUC = 0.89 for predicting conversion in 
ApoE4-negative MCI. These observations support the proposed biomarker trajectory 
in AD, which postulates that amyloid markers become abnormal early in the 
disease course while markers of neurodegeneration become abnormal later in the 
disease course and suggests that ApoE4 could be at least partially responsible 
for some of the observed disease heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.12.012
PMCID: PMC3952354
PMID: 24634832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2018 Jul 12;4:765-774. doi: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.06.008. 
eCollection 2018.

Effects of sex, educational background, and chronic kidney disease grading on 
longitudinal cognitive and functional decline in patients in the Japanese 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative study.

Iwata A(1), Iwatsubo T(2), Ihara R(2), Suzuki K(2), Matsuyama Y(3), Tomita N(4), 
Arai H(4), Ishii K(5), Senda M(6), Ito K(7), Ikeuchi T(8), Kuwano R(8), Matsuda 
H(9); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; Japanese Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Unit for Early and Exploratory Clinical Development, The University of Tokyo 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, The University of 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Geriatrics & Gerontology, Division of Brain Science, Institute 
of Development, Aging and Cancer (IDAC), Tohoku University, Japan.
(5)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation, Kobe, Japan.
(7)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(8)Niigata University, Niigata, Japan.
(9)National Center for Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The objective of this study was to determine whether sex or 
education level affects the longitudinal rate of cognitive decline in Japanese 
patients in the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative study with defined 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We accessed the entire Japanese Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative data set of 537 individuals, among whom 234 had MCI and 149 had 
Alzheimer's disease. We classified participants into three categories of 
educational history: (1) low, 0 to 9 years; (2) moderate, 10 to 15 years; and 
(3) high ≥16 years. We examined the main effects and interactions of visit, sex, 
and educational achievement on scores for the Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of 
Boxes, Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale 13, Mini-Mental 
State Examination, and Functional Activities Questionnaire in a longitudinal 
manner.
RESULTS: Women with MCI had a significantly faster rate of decline than men over 
a 3-year period. Highly educated men showed a significantly slower rate of 
decline than the other groups. Sex differences in the rates of decline remained 
after stratification by amyloid or apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 status but were 
absent in Alzheimer's disease over a 2-year period. Subtle differences in 
chronic kidney disease grade affected the rate of decline. A higher Fazekas 
periventricular hyperintensity score was associated with a lower estimated 
glomerular filtration rate in women only.
DISCUSSION: In patients with MCI, sex and educational history significantly 
affected the rate of change in cognitive and clinical assessments. Furthermore, 
a subtle decline in chronic kidney disease grade was associated with a faster 
rate of decline regardless of amyloid pathology in women.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trci.2018.06.008
PMCID: PMC6324255
PMID: 30662934


186. Neuroimage Clin. 2018 Apr 16;19:190-201. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.04.016. 
eCollection 2018.

Longitudinal structural cerebral changes related to core CSF biomarkers in 
preclinical Alzheimer's disease: A study of two independent datasets.

Falcon C(1), Tucholka A(2), Monté-Rubio GC(3), Cacciaglia R(2), Operto G(2), 
Rami L(4), Gispert JD(5), Molinuevo JL(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain; CIBER-BBN, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain; Neurology Department, Hospital Clínic i Provincial de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain; CIBER-BBN, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
jdgispert@barcelobabeta.org.
(6)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center, Pasqual Maragall Foundation, Barcelona, 
Spain; Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain; Neurology Department, Hospital Clínic i Provincial de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; CIBER Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable 
(CIBERFES), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jlmolinuevo@barcelonabeta.org.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by an accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ42) 
accompanied by brain atrophy and cognitive decline. Several recent studies have 
shown that Aβ42 accumulation is associated with gray matter (GM) changes prior 
to the development of cognitive impairment, in the so-called preclinical stage 
of the AD (pre-AD). It also has been proved that the GM atrophy profile is not 
linear, both in normal ageing but, especially, on AD. However, several other 
factors may influence this association and may have an impact on the 
generalization of results from different samples. In this work, we estimate 
differences in rates of GM volume change in cognitively healthy elders in 
association with baseline core cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers, and 
assess to what these differences are sample dependent. We report the dependence 
of atrophy rates, measured in a two-year interval, on Aβ42, computed both over 
continuous and categorical values of Aβ42, at voxel-level (p < 0.001; k < 100) 
and corrected for sex, age and education. Analyses were performed jointly and 
separately, on two samples. The first sample was formed of 31 individuals (22 
Ctrl and 9 pre-AD), aged 60-80 and recruited at the Hospital Clinic of 
Barcelona. The second sample was a replica of the first one with subjects 
selected from the ADNI dataset. We also investigated the dependence of the GM 
atrophy rate on the basal levels of continuous p-tau and on the p-tau/Aβ42 
ratio. Correlation analyses on the whole sample showed a dependence of GM 
atrophy rates on Aβ42 in medial and orbital frontal, precuneus, cingulate, 
medial temporal regions and cerebellum. Correlations with p-tau were located in 
the left hippocampus, parahippocampus and striatal nuclei whereas correlation 
with p-tau/Aβ42 was mainly found in ventral and medial temporal areas. Regarding 
analyses performed separately, we found a substantial discrepancy of results 
between samples, illustrating the complexities of comparing two independent 
datasets even when using the same inclusion criteria. Such discrepancies may 
lead to significant differences in the sample size needed to detect a particular 
reduction on cerebral atrophy rates in prevention trials. Higher cognitive 
reserve and more advanced pathological progression in the ADNI sample could 
partially account for the observed discrepancies. Taken together, our findings 
in these two samples highlight the importance of comparing and merging 
independent datasets to draw more robust and generalizable conclusions on the 
structural changes in the preclinical stages of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.04.016
PMCID: PMC6050455
PMID: 30023169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Neuroinformatics. 2020 Jun;18(3):429-449. doi: 10.1007/s12021-019-09439-6.

Automated White Matter Hyperintensity Segmentation Using Bayesian Model 
Selection: Assessment and Correlations with Cognitive Change.

Fiford CM(1), Sudre CH(2)(3)(4), Pemberton H(2), Walsh P(2), Manning E(2), 
Malone IB(2), Nicholas J(5), Bouvy WH(6), Carmichael OT(7), Biessels GJ(6), 
Cardoso MJ(2)(3)(4), Barnes J(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK. cassidy.fiford.10@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Queen 
Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK.
(5)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(6)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(7)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.

Accurate, automated white matter hyperintensity (WMH) segmentations are needed 
for large-scale studies to understand contributions of WMH to neurological 
diseases. We evaluated Bayesian Model Selection (BaMoS), a hierarchical 
fully-unsupervised model selection framework for WMH segmentation. We compared 
BaMoS segmentations to semi-automated segmentations, and assessed whether they 
predicted longitudinal cognitive change in control, early Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (EMCI), late Mild Cognitive Impairment (LMCI), subjective/significant 
memory concern (SMC) and Alzheimer's (AD) participants. Data were downloaded 
from the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Magnetic resonance 
images from 30 control and 30 AD participants were selected to incorporate 
multiple scanners, and were semi-automatically segmented by 4 raters and BaMoS. 
Segmentations were assessed using volume correlation, Dice score, and other 
spatial metrics. Linear mixed-effect models were fitted to 180 control, 107 SMC, 
320 EMCI, 171 LMCI and 151 AD participants separately in each group, with the 
outcomes being cognitive change (e.g. mini-mental state examination; MMSE), and 
BaMoS WMH, age, sex, race and education used as predictors. There was a high 
level of agreement between BaMoS' WMH segmentation volumes and a consensus of 
rater segmentations, with a median Dice score of 0.74 and correlation 
coefficient of 0.96. BaMoS WMH predicted cognitive change in: control, EMCI, and 
SMC groups using MMSE; LMCI using clinical dementia rating scale; and EMCI using 
Alzheimer's disease assessment scale-cognitive subscale (p < 0.05, all tests). 
BaMoS compares well to semi-automated segmentation, is robust to different WMH 
loads and scanners, and can generate volumes which predict decline. BaMoS can be 
applicable to further large-scale studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-019-09439-6
PMCID: PMC7338814
PMID: 32062817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Healthc Eng. 2019 Jan 29;2019:9507193. doi: 10.1155/2019/9507193. eCollection 
2019.

Cloud-Based Brain Magnetic Resonance Image Segmentation and Parcellation System 
for Individualized Prediction of Cognitive Worsening.

Sakamoto R(1)(2), Marano C(3)(4), Miller MI(5)(6), Lyketsos CG(3), Li Y(6), Mori 
S(1)(6)(7), Oishi K(1), Adni ADNI(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Kyoto University School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bayview and 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Center for Imaging Science, School or Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)AnatomyWorks, LLC, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)F. M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative Study, USA.

For patients with cognitive disorders and dementia, accurate prognosis of 
cognitive worsening is critical to their ability to prepare for the future, in 
collaboration with health-care providers. Despite multiple efforts to apply 
computational brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) analysis in predicting 
cognitive worsening, with several successes, brain MRI is not routinely 
quantified in clinical settings to guide prognosis and clinical decision-making. 
To encourage the clinical use of a cutting-edge image segmentation method, we 
developed a prediction model as part of an established web-based cloud platform, 
MRICloud. The model was built in a training dataset from Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) where baseline MRI scans were combined with 
clinical data over time. Each MRI was parcellated into 265 anatomical units 
based on the MRICloud fully automated image segmentation function, to measure 
the volume of each parcel. The Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was used as 
a measure of cognitive function. The normalized volume of 265 parcels, combined 
with baseline MMSE score, age, and sex were input variables for a Least Absolute 
Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) regression analysis, with MMSE change 
in the subsequent two years as the target for prediction. A leave-one-out 
analysis performed on the training dataset estimated a correlation coefficient 
of 0.64 between true and predicted MMSE change. A receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis estimated a sensitivity of 0.88 and a specificity 
of 0.76 in predicting substantial cognitive worsening after two years, defined 
as MMSE decline of ≥4 points. This MRICloud prediction model was then applied to 
a test dataset of clinically acquired MRIs from the Johns Hopkins Memory and 
Alzheimer's Treatment Center (MATC), a clinical care setting. In the latter 
setting, the model had both sensitivity and specificity of 1.0 in predicting 
substantial cognitive worsening. While the MRICloud prediction model 
demonstrated promise as a platform on which computational MRI findings can 
easily be extended to clinical use, further study with a larger number of 
patients is needed for validation.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/9507193
PMCID: PMC6374863
PMID: 30838124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Front Neurosci. 2018 Aug 21;12:576. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00576. eCollection 
2018.

MRI Asymmetry Index of Hippocampal Subfields Increases Through the Continuum 
From the Mild Cognitive Impairment to the Alzheimer's Disease.

Sarica A(1), Vasta R(1), Novellino F(2), Vaccaro MG(1), Cerasa A(2)(3), 
Quattrone A(1)(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Centre, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Neuroimaging Research Unit, Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, 
National Research Council, Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)S. Anna Institute and Research in Advanced Neurorehabilitation, Crotone, 
Italy.

Objective: It is well-known that the hippocampus presents significant asymmetry 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and that difference in volumes between left and 
right exists and varies with disease progression. However, few works 
investigated whether the asymmetry degree of subfields of hippocampus changes 
through the continuum from Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) to AD. Thus, aim of 
the present work was to evaluate the Asymmetry Index (AI) of hippocampal 
substructures as possible MRI biomarkers of Dementia. Moreover, we aimed to 
assess whether the subfields presented peculiar differences between left and 
right hemispheres. We also investigated the relationship between the asymmetry 
magnitude in hippocampal subfields and the decline of verbal memory as assessed 
by Rey's auditory verbal learning test (RAVLT). Methods: Four-hundred subjects 
were selected from ADNI, equally divided into healthy controls (HC), AD, stable 
MCI (sMCI), and progressive MCI (pMCI). The structural baseline T1s were 
processed with FreeSurfer 6.0 and volumes of whole hippocampus (WH) and 12 
subfields were extracted. The AI was calculated as: 
(|Left-Right|/(Left+Right))*100. ANCOVA was used for evaluating AI differences 
between diagnoses, while paired t-test was applied for assessing changes between 
left and right volumes, separately for each group. Partial correlation was 
performed for exploring relationship between RAVLT summary scores (Immediate, 
Learning, Forgetting, Percent Forgetting) and hippocampal substructures AI. The 
statistical threshold was Bonferroni corrected p < 0.05/13 = 0.0038. Results: We 
found a general trend of increased degree of asymmetry with increasing severity 
of diagnosis. Indeed, AD presented the higher magnitude of asymmetry compared 
with HC, sMCI and pMCI, in the WH (AI mean 5.13 ± 4.29 SD) and in each of its 
twelve subfields. Moreover, we found in AD a significant negative correlation (r 
= -0.33, p = 0.00065) between the AI of parasubiculum (mean 12.70 ± 9.59 SD) and 
the RAVLT Learning score (mean 1.70 ± 1.62 SD). Conclusions: Our findings showed 
that hippocampal subfields AI varies differently among the four groups HC, sMCI, 
pMCI, and AD. Moreover, we found-for the first time-that hippocampal 
substructures had different sub-patterns of lateralization compared with the 
whole hippocampus. Importantly, the severity in learning rate was correlated 
with pathological high degree of asymmetry in parasubiculum of AD patients.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00576
PMCID: PMC6111896
PMID: 30186103


190. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;21:101637. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101637. Epub 2018 Dec 
10.

Prognosis of conversion of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's dementia by 
voxel-wise Cox regression based on FDG PET data.

Sörensen A(1), Blazhenets G(2), Rücker G(3), Schiller F(2), Meyer PT(2), Frings 
L(4); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
arnd.soerensen@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics, Medical Center, University of 
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, 
Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany; Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology 
Freiburg, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, 
Germany.

AIM: The value of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET for the prognosis of 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's dementia (AD) is 
controversial. In the present work, the identification of cerebral metabolic 
patterns with significant prognostic value for conversion of MCI patients to AD 
is investigated with voxel-based Cox regression, which in contrast to common 
categorical comparisons also utilizes time information.
METHODS: FDG PET data of 544 MCI patients from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database were randomly split into two 
equally-sized datasets (training and test). Within a median follow-up duration 
of 47 months (95% CI: 46-48 months) 181 patients developed AD. In the training 
dataset, voxel-wise Cox regressions were used to identify regions associated 
with conversion of MCI to AD. These were compared to regions identified by a 
classical group comparison (analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with statistical 
parametric mapping (SPM) 8) between converters and non-converters (both adjusted 
for apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype, mini-mental state examination (MMSE) 
score, age, sex and education). In the test dataset, normalized FDG uptake 
within significant brain regions from voxel-wise Cox- and ANCOVA analyses (Cox- 
and ANCOVA- regions of interest (ROI), respectively) and clinical variables APOE 
status, MMSE score and education were tested in different Cox models (adjusted 
for age, sex) including: (1) only clinical variables, (2) only normalized FDG 
uptake in ANCOVA-ROI, (3) only normalized FDG uptake from Cox-ROI, (4) clinical 
variables plus FDG uptake in ANCOVA-ROI, (5) clinical variables plus FDG uptake 
from Cox-ROI.
RESULTS: Conversion-related regions with relative hypometabolism comprised parts 
of the temporo-parietal and posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus for voxel-wise 
ANCOVA, plus frontal regions for voxel-wise Cox regression (both p < .01, false 
discovery rate (FDR) corrected). The clinical-only model (1) and the models 
based on normalized FDG uptake from Cox-ROI only (2) and ANCOVA-ROI only (3) all 
significantly predicted conversion to AD (Wald Test (WT): p < .001). The 
clinical model (1) was significantly improved by adding imaging information in 
model (4) (Akaike information criterion (AIC) relative likelihood (RL) (1) vs 
(4): RL < 0.018). There were no significant differences between models (2) and 
(3), as well as (4) and (5).
CONCLUSIONS: Voxel-wise Cox regression identifies conversion-related patterns of 
cerebral glucose metabolism, but is not superior to classical group contrasts in 
this regard. With imaging information from both FDG PET patterns, the prediction 
of conversion to AD was improved.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101637
PMCID: PMC6411907
PMID: 30553760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2020 Sep 9;6(1):e12059. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12059. 
eCollection 2020.

Development of a novel cognitive composite outcome to assess therapeutic effects 
of exercise in the EXERT trial for adults with MCI: The ADAS-Cog-Exec.

Jacobs DM(1)(2)(3), Thomas RG(2)(4), Salmon DP(1)(2)(3), Jin S(2)(4), Feldman 
HH(1)(2)(3), Cotman CW(5), Baker LD(6); Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study 
EXERT Study Group; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences University of California San Diego La Jolla 
California USA.
(2)Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study University of California San Diego La 
Jolla California.
(3)Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center University of California 
San Diego La Jolla California USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics Department of Family Medicine & Public Health 
University of California San Diego La Jolla California USA.
(5)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders University of 
California Irvine Irvine California USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine-Geriatrics Wake Forest School of Medicine 
Winston-Salem North Carolina USA.

INTRODUCTION: Use of cognitive composites as primary outcome measures is 
increasingly common in clinical trials of preclinical and prodromal Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Composite outcomes can decrease intra-individual variability, 
resulting in improved sensitivity to detect longitudinal change and increased 
statistical power. We developed a novel composite outcome, the ADAS-Cog-Exec, 
for use in the EXERT trial-a Phase 3 randomized, controlled, 12-month exercise 
intervention in mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Three combinations of cognitive measures selected from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale version 13 (ADAS-Cog13), tests of 
executive function, and the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) were created based on 
previously documented sensitivity to longitudinal change in MCI and to the 
effects of exercise. Optimally weighted composites of each combination were 
modeled using data from the ADNI-1 MCI cohort. Ten-fold cross-validation was 
performed to obtain a bias-corrected mean to standard deviation ratio (MSDR). 
The cognitive composites were assessed for their sensitivity to detect 12-month 
change in MCI.
RESULTS: The MSDR of 12-month change for each of the composite outcomes tested 
exceeded that of the ADAS-Cog13 total score. The composite with the highest MSDR 
(MSDR = 0.48) and associated statistical power included scores on ADAS-Cog13 
Word Recall, Delayed Word Recall, Orientation, and Number Cancellation subtests; 
Trail-Making Tests A & B, Digit Symbol Substitution and Category Fluency; and 
cognitive components of the CDR (Memory, Orientation, Judgement & Problem 
Solving).
DISCUSSION: An optimally weighted cognitive composite measure was identified and 
validated for use in EXERT. This composite contained selected subtests from the 
ADAS-Cog13, additional measures of executive function, and box scores for 
cognitive components of the CDR. Because this composite score demonstrated high 
sensitivity to longitudinal change in MCI it will be used as the primary outcome 
measure for the EXERT trial.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12059
PMCID: PMC7507362
PMID: 32995469

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
report. HHF reports grants to UC San Diego from Toyama Pharmaceuticals, Biohaven 
Pharmaceuticals, Annovis (QR Pharma), AC Immune, and Vivoryon (Probiodrug); 
service agreements through UC San Diego for consulting with Novo Nordisk, Eisai 
Pharmaceuticals, Merck Pharmaceuticals, Tau RX, Samus Therapeutics, Arkuda 
Therapeutics, Samumed, and Axon Neurosciences; agreements with Roche/Genentech 
Pharmaceuticals for DMC and DSMB activities and with Tau Consortium for 
Scientific Advisory Board; travel expenses from ADDF, Samus, Samumed, Axon, and 
Novo Nordisk; and speaker fees to UC San Diego from Optum Health and Medscape. 
DPS was a paid consultant for Aptinx, Inc. and Biogen, Inc.


192. Brain Imaging Behav. 2012 Dec;6(4):517-27. doi: 10.1007/s11682-012-9176-1.

A composite score for executive functioning, validated in Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) participants with baseline mild cognitive 
impairment.

Gibbons LE(1), Carle AC, Mackin RS, Harvey D, Mukherjee S, Insel P, Curtis SM, 
Mungas D, Crane PK; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner M, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Liu 
E, Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Gamst A, Thomas RG, Donohue M, 
Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Beckett L, Harvey D, Gamst A, Donohue M, Kornak 
J, Jack CR Jr, Dale A, Bernstein M, Felmlee J, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
Alexander G, DeCarli C, Jagust W, Bandy D, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen 
K, Mathis C, Morris J, Cairns NJ, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Shaw L, Lee 
VM, Korecka M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen 
L, Kachaturian Z, Frank R, Snyder PJ, Molchan S, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, Dolen 
S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Heidebrink JL, 
Lord JL, Petersen R, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Chowdhury M, Stern 
Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Morris JC, Ances B, Carroll M, Leon S, Mintun MA, 
Schneider S, Marson D, Griffith R, Clark D, Grossman H, Mitsis E, Romirowsky A, 
deToledo-Morrell L, Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Roberts P, Albert M, Onyike C, 
Kielb S, Rusinek H, de Leon MJ, Glodzik L, De Santi S, Doraiswamy P, Petrella 
JR, Coleman R, Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk D, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, 
Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein BS, Martin K, Makino 
KM, Ismail M, Brand C, Mulnard RA, Thai G, Mc-Adams-Ortiz C, Womack K, Mathews 
D, Quiceno M, Diaz-Arrastia R, King R, Weiner M, Martin-Cook K, DeVous M, Levey 
AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Anderson HS, Swerdlow RH, Apostolova L, Lu PH, 
Bartzokis G, Silverman DH, Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Johnson H, Farlow MR, 
Hake AM, Matthews BR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GY, Feldman H, 
Mudge B, Assaly M, Kertesz A, Rogers J, Trost D, Bernick C, Munic D, Kerwin D, 
Mesulam MM, Lipowski K, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, 
Turner RS, Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Frey M, 
Yesavage J, Taylor JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh M, Belden C, 
Jacobson S, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, 
Wolday S, Bwayo SK, Lerner A, Hudson L, Ogrocki P, Fletcher E, Carmichael O, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, Johnson S, Asthana 
S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Fleisher A, Reeder S, 
Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, Scharre DW, Kataki M, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, 
Brown AD, Pearlson GD, Blank K, Anderson K, Saykin AJ, Santulli RB, Schwartz ES, 
Sink KM, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Querfurth H, Tremont G, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Mintzer J, Flynn Longmire 
C, Spicer K, Finger E, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D.

Author information:
(1)Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Box 359780, 325 Ninth 
Avenue, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. gibbonsl@washington.edu

The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) measures abilities 
broadly related to executive function (EF), including WAIS-R Digit Symbol 
Substitution, Digit Span Backwards, Trails A and B, Category Fluency, and Clock 
Drawing. This study investigates whether a composite executive function measure 
based on these multiple indicators has better psychometric characteristics than 
the widely used individual components. We applied item response theory methods 
to 800 ADNI participants to derive an EF composite score (ADNI-EF) from the 
above measures. We then compared ADNI-EF with component measures in 390 
longitudinally-followed participants with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) with 
respect to: (1) Ability to detect change over time; (2) Ability to predict 
conversion to dementia; (3) Strength of cross-sectional association with 
MRI-derived measures of structures involved in frontal systems, and (4) Strength 
of baseline association with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of amyloid β₁₋₄₂, 
total tau, and phosphorylated tau(181P). ADNI-EF showed the greatest change over 
time, followed closely by Category Fluency. ADNI-EF needed a 40 % smaller sample 
size to detect change. ADNI-EF was the strongest predictor of AD conversion. 
ADNI-EF was the only measure significantly associated with all the MRI regions, 
though other measures were more strongly associated in a few of the regions. 
ADNI-EF was associated with all the CSF measures. ADNI-EF appears to be a useful 
composite measure of EF in MCI, as good as or better than any of its composite 
parts. This study demonstrates an approach to developing a psychometrically 
sophisticated composite score from commonly-used tests.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-012-9176-1
PMCID: PMC3684181
PMID: 22644789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Arch Neurol. 2012 May;69(5):614-22. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.3029.

Comparison of imaging biomarkers in the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative and the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging.

Whitwell JL(1), Wiste HJ, Weigand SD, Rocca WA, Knopman DS, Roberts RO, Boeve 
BF, Petersen RC, Jack CR Jr; Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. whitwell.jennifer@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether magnetic resonance imaging measurements observed 
in the Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) convenience sample 
differ from those observed in the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA) 
population-based sample.
DESIGN: Comparison of 2 samples.
SETTING: Fifty-nine recruiting sites for the ADNI in the United States and 
Canada and the MCSA, a population-based cohort in Olmsted County, Minnesota.
PATIENTS: Cognitively normal subjects and amnestic subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment were selected from the ADNI convenience cohort and MCSA 
population-based cohort. A simple random sample of subjects from both cohorts in 
the same age range was selected, and a second sample applied matching for age, 
sex, educational level, apolipoprotein E genotype, and Mini-Mental State 
Examination score.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Baseline hippocampal volumes and annual percentage of 
decline in hippocampal volume.
RESULTS: In the population-based sample, MCSA subjects were older, had less 
education, performed worse on the Mini-Mental State Examination, and had a 
family history of Alzheimer disease less often than did ADNI subjects. Baseline 
hippocampal volumes were larger in ADNI compared with MCSA cognitively normal 
subjects in the random sample, although no differences were observed after 
matching. Rates of decline in hippocampal volume were greater in the ADNI 
compared with the MCSA for cognitively normal subjects and those with amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment, even after matching.
CONCLUSIONS: Rates of decline in hippocampal volume suggest that ADNI subjects 
have a more aggressive brain pathologic process than MCSA subjects and hence may 
not be representative of the general population. These findings have 
implications for treatment trials that use ADNI-like recruitment mechanisms and 
for studies validating new diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer disease in its 
various stages.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.3029
PMCID: PMC3569033
PMID: 22782510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Pers Med. 2020 Dec 26;11(1):14. doi: 10.3390/jpm11010014.

A Conformation Variant of p53 Combined with Machine Learning Identifies 
Alzheimer Disease in Preclinical and Prodromal Stages.

Abate G(1), Vezzoli M(1), Polito L(2), Guaita A(2), Albani D(3), Marizzoni M(4), 
Garrafa E(1), Marengoni A(5), Forloni G(3), Frisoni GB(6), Cummings JL(7), Memo 
M(1), Uberti D(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
25123 Brescia, Italy.
(2)GolgiCenci Foundation, 20081 Abbiategrasso, Italy.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario 
Negri", 20156 Milan, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Alzheimer's Neuroimaging and Epidemiology (LANE), IRCCS 
Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, 25125 Brescia, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Lombardy, 25123 Brescia, Italy.
(6)Memory Clinic, University Hospitals and University of Geneva, 1205 Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(7)Department of Brain Health, School of Integrated Health Sciences, University 
of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV) and Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain 
Health, Las Vegas, NV 89106, USA.
(8)Molecular Markers Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, 25125 Brescia, Italy.

Early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a crucial starting point in 
disease management. Blood-based biomarkers could represent a considerable 
advantage in providing AD-risk information in primary care settings. Here, we 
report new data for a relatively unknown blood-based biomarker that holds 
promise for AD diagnosis. We evaluate a p53-misfolding conformation recognized 
by the antibody 2D3A8, also named Unfolded p53 (U-p532D3A8+), in 375 plasma 
samples derived from InveCe.Ab and PharmaCog/E-ADNI longitudinal studies. A 
machine learning approach is used to combine U-p532D3A8+ plasma levels with 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and apolipoprotein E epsilon-4 (APOEε4) and 
is able to predict AD likelihood risk in InveCe.Ab with an overall 86.67% 
agreement with clinical diagnosis. These algorithms also accurately classify 
(AUC = 0.92) Aβ+-amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) patients who will 
develop AD in PharmaCog/E-ADNI, where subjects were stratified according to 
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD markers (Aβ42 and p-Tau). Results support 
U-p532D3A8+ plasma level as a promising additional candidate blood-based 
biomarker for AD.

DOI: 10.3390/jpm11010014
PMCID: PMC7823360
PMID: 33375220

Conflict of interest statement: D.U. and M.Me are co-founders and stakeholders 
of Diadem srl and are co-authors of the patents “Method for early identification 
of Alzheimer’s Disease” MI2003A00179/102003901142126; “Antibody binding a linear 
epitope of p53 and its diagnostic applications” PCT/EP2015/072094/family 15122V. 
All the other authors have no competing interest related to this manuscript.


195. Neurobiol Aging. 2024 Dec 13;147:60-67. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.12.002. Online ahead of print.

Modeling functional loss in Alzheimer's Disease through cognitive reserve and 
cognitive state: A panel data longitudinal study.

Veronelli L(1), Tosi G(2), Romano D(2); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca and Milan Center for 
Neuroscience, Milan, Italy; Department of Neurorehabilitation Sciences, Casa di 
Cura IGEA, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: laura.veronelli@unimib.it.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca and Milan Center for 
Neuroscience, Milan, Italy.

Cognitive Reserve (CR) refers to the brain's ability, supported by active and 
modifiable forms of lifestyle compensation, to cope with neural changes due to 
age or disease, delaying the onset of cognitive deficits. In CR studies, 
neuropsychological performances and functional autonomy are considered 
alternative outcomes. While decreased functional independence gains importance 
in dementia diagnosis and monitoring, cognitive functioning may play a role in 
staging its severity. The main aim of the present study was to test a 
longitudinal model of Alzheimer's Disease (AD), in which CR (years of education) 
and current cognitive status (Mini-Mental State Examination, MMSE, score) would 
predict clinical progression in terms of loss of functional independence at a 
later time. From the ADNI database, we considered 308 AD participants, and for 
180 of them, we could extract CSF Aβ1-42 baseline levels as an index of amyloid 
burden. Functional decline (one-year delta score at the Functional Activities of 
Daily Living Questionnaire) was explained by the CR and MMSE score interaction 
net of age; a trend was found also when controlling for amyloid burden. 
Functional decline at one year was increased for patients with high CR levels 
and low MMSE and with low CR and high cognitive state, compared to the opposite. 
The present investigation demonstrated the mutual role of past acquired CR and 
current cognitive status in predicting functional progression in AD. The study 
suggests a way to predictively interpret available demographic and clinical 
data, defining differential longitudinal trajectories that might be useful for 
clinical management.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.12.002
PMID: 39708761

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


196. Neuroimage. 2008 Nov 15;43(3):458-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.013. 
Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Tensor-based morphometry as a neuroimaging biomarker for Alzheimer's disease: an 
MRI study of 676 AD, MCI, and normal subjects.

Hua X(1), Leow AD, Parikshak N, Lee S, Chiang MC, Toga AW, Jack CR Jr, Weiner 
MW, Thompson PM; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of 
Medicine, Neuroscience Research Building 225E, 635 Charles Young Drive, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA.

In one of the largest brain MRI studies to date, we used tensor-based 
morphometry (TBM) to create 3D maps of structural atrophy in 676 subjects with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and healthy elderly 
controls, scanned as part of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI). Using inverse-consistent 3D non-linear elastic image registration, we 
warped 676 individual brain MRI volumes to a population mean geometric template. 
Jacobian determinant maps were created, revealing the 3D profile of local 
volumetric expansion and compression. We compared the anatomical distribution of 
atrophy in 165 AD patients (age: 75.6+/-7.6 years), 330 MCI subjects 
(74.8+/-7.5), and 181 controls (75.9+/-5.1). Brain atrophy in selected 
regions-of-interest was correlated with clinical measurements--the sum-of-boxes 
clinical dementia rating (CDR-SB), mini-mental state examination (MMSE), and the 
logical memory test scores - at voxel level followed by correction for multiple 
comparisons. Baseline temporal lobe atrophy correlated with current cognitive 
performance, future cognitive decline, and conversion from MCI to AD over the 
following year; it predicted future decline even in healthy subjects. Over half 
of the AD and MCI subjects carried the ApoE4 (apolipoprotein E4) gene, which 
increases risk for AD; they showed greater hippocampal and temporal lobe 
deficits than non-carriers. ApoE2 gene carriers--1/6 of the normal group--showed 
reduced ventricular expansion, suggesting a protective effect. As an automated 
image analysis technique, TBM reveals 3D correlations between neuroimaging 
markers, genes, and future clinical changes, and is highly efficient for 
large-scale MRI studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.07.013
PMCID: PMC3197851
PMID: 18691658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;68(1):405-414. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180971.

The Influence of BDNF Val66Met Polymorphism on Cognition, Cerebrospinal Fluid, 
and Neuroimaging Markers in Non-Demented Elderly.

Xia H(1), Wang M(2), Li JQ(1), Tan CC(1), Cao XP(3), Tan L(1), Yu JT(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
China.
(2)College of Nursing, Qingdao University, China.
(3)Clinical Research Center, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao University, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Huashan Hospital, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) Val66Met polymorphism 
emerged as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, little was known 
about its effects on the process of potential AD.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of the Val66Met polymorphism on cognition, 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and neuroimaging markers in non-demented elderly 
individuals.
METHODS: A total of 1,081 adults without dementia (375 healthy subjects and 706 
individuals with mild cognitive impairment) were recruited from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to test the influence of BDNF Val66Met 
polymorphism on cognitive impairment, brain structure atrophy, and change in the 
levels of CSF biomarkers. Moreover, we also conducted our study in abnormal 
amyloid-β (A+) subgroup and normal amyloid-β (A-) subgroup, as well as in APOEɛ4 
carriers and non-carriers.
RESULTS: The BDNF Val66Met polymorphism had significant association with atrophy 
of the entorhinal cortex and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores in the 
non-demented elderly and A + subgroup, while no association was found in 
A-subgroup. What is more, there was a significant effect of interaction between 
BDNF Val66Met and amyloid-β load in MMSE. In addition, significant associations 
of BDNF Val66Met with the entorhinal cortex and ventricular volumes were found 
among APOEɛ4 non-carriers, but not APOEɛ4 carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: The BDNF Val66Met polymorphism is associated with cognitive 
impairment and brain atrophy among the non-demented elderly, APOEɛ4 non-carriers 
and A + subgroup, implying the potential of the Val66Met polymorphism as an 
important genetic factor for AD-related neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180971
PMID: 30775992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Eur J Med Res. 2023 Oct 12;28(1):427. doi: 10.1186/s40001-023-01265-6.

Bayesian estimation for the accuracy of three neuropsychological tests in 
detecting Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: a retrospective 
analysis of the ADNI database.

Wang X(#)(1)(2), Li F(#)(1)(2), Tian J(1)(2), Gao Q(3)(4), Zhu H(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Capital Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Capital Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, 
People's Republic of China. gaoqi@ccmu.edu.cn.
(4)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, People's Republic of China. gaoqi@ccmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Maternal and Child Health, School of Public Health, Capital 
Medical University, No. 10, Xi Toutiao You Anmenwai, Beijing, 100069, People's 
Republic of China. zhuhuiping@ccmu.edu.cn.
(6)Laboratory for Gene-Environment and Reproductive Health, Laboratory for 
Clinical Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China. zhuhuiping@ccmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The neuropathological confirmation serves as the gold standard for 
diagnosing Alzheimer's disease (AD), but it is usually not available to the 
living individuals. In addition, the gold standard for diagnosing Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) remains unclear yet. Neuropsychological testing, such as the 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog), is commonly 
used tests in identifying AD and MCI, offering convenience, affordability, 
non-invasiveness, and accessibility in clinical settings. We aimed to accurately 
evaluate the discriminative ability of the three tests administrated at the same 
visit simultaneously in detecting AD and MCI due to AD in the absence of a gold 
standard.
METHODS: A total of 1289 participants aged over 65 were included from the 
baseline visits of Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Bayesian latent 
class models, accounting for conditional dependence between MoCA and MMSE, were 
conducted to assess the diagnostic accuracy of the three tests for detecting AD 
and MCI.
RESULTS: In detecting AD, the ADAS-cog had the highest Youden's Index (0.829), 
followed by the MoCA(0.813) and MMSE(0.796). The ADAS-cog and MoCA showed 
similar sensitivity (0.922 vs 0.912) and specificity (0.907 vs 0.901), while the 
MMSE had lower sensitivity (0.874) and higher specificity (0.922). For MCI 
detection, the ADAS-cog had the highest Youden's Index (0.704) compared to the 
MoCA (0.614) and MMSE (0.478). The ADAS-cog exhibited the highest sensitivity, 
closely followed by the MoCA and MMSE (0.869 vs 0.845 vs 0.757), and the 
ADAS-cog also had good specificity (0.835 vs 0.769 vs 0.721). The estimated true 
prevalence of AD among individuals aged over 65 was 20.0%, and the estimated 
true prevalence of MCI due to AD was 24.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that the ADAS-cog and MoCA are reliable tools 
for detecting AD and MCI, while the MMSE may be less sensitive in detecting 
these conditions. A large underdiagnosis of the MCI and Alzheimer's population 
still remains in clinical screening.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-023-01265-6
PMCID: PMC10568914
PMID: 37821912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


199. Eur Radiol. 2010 Mar;20(3):674-82. doi: 10.1007/s00330-009-1581-5. Epub 2009 Sep 
16.

Volume changes in Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment: cognitive 
associations.

Evans MC(1), Barnes J, Nielsen C, Kim LG, Clegg SL, Blair M, Leung KK, Douiri A, 
Boyes RG, Ourselin S, Fox NC; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, 
WC1N 3BG, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between MRI-derived changes in whole-brain 
and ventricular volume with change in cognitive scores in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and control subjects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In total 131 control, 231 MCI and 99 AD subjects from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort with T1-weighted 
volumetric MRIs from baseline and 12-month follow-up were used to derive volume 
changes. Mini mental state examination (MMSE), Alzheimer's disease assessment 
scale (ADAS)-cog and trails test changes were calculated over the same period.
RESULTS: Brain atrophy rates and ventricular enlargement differed between 
subject groups (p < 0.0005) and in MCI and AD were associated with MMSE changes. 
Both measures were additionally associated with ADAS-cog and trails-B in MCI 
patients, and ventricular expansion was associated with ADAS-cog in AD patients. 
Brain atrophy (p < 0.0005) and ventricular expansion rates (p = 0.001) were 
higher in MCI subjects who progressed to AD within 12 months of follow-up 
compared with MCI subjects who remained stable. MCI subjects who progressed to 
AD within 12 months had similar atrophy rates to AD subjects.
CONCLUSION: Whole-brain atrophy rates and ventricular enlargement differed 
between patient groups and healthy controls, and tracked disease progression and 
psychological decline, demonstrating their relevance as biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-009-1581-5
PMID: 19760240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Transl Neurodegener. 2018 Sep 10;7:23. doi: 10.1186/s40035-018-0127-7. 
eCollection 2018.

Cerebrospinal fluid phosphorylated tau, visinin-like protein-1, and 
chitinase-3-like protein 1 in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang H(1), Ng KP(2), Therriault J(3), Kang MS(3), Pascoal TA(3), Rosa-Neto 
P(3), Gauthier S(3); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016 China.
(2)2Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(3)3The McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Visinin-like protein-1 (VILIP-1) and chitinase-3-like protein 1 
(CHI3L1 or YKL-40) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are newly discovered markers 
indicating neuronal damage and microglial activation, respectively. 
Phosphorylated tau (p-tau) reflects the neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and is useful as diagnostic markers for AD. However, it is unknown whether 
these biomarkers have similar or complementary information in AD.
METHODS: We stratified 121 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database into cognitively normal (CN), stable 
mild cognitive impairment (sMCI), progressive MCI (pMCI), and dementia due to 
AD. Analysis of covariance (ANOVA) and chi-square analyses, Spearman 
correlation, and logistic regression models were performed to test the 
demographic, associations between biomarkers, and diagnostic accuracies, 
respectively. Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate the effects of 
CSF amyloid-β (Aβ) on above biomarkers within diagnostic groups, the combination 
of diagnostic group and Aβ status as predictor, and CSF biomarkers as predictors 
of AD features, including cognition measured by Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) and brain structure and white matter hyperintensity (WMH) measured by 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
RESULTS: P-tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40 were all predictors of AD diagnosis, but 
combinations of biomarkers did not improve the diagnostic accuracy (AUC 0.924 
for p-tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40) compared to p-tau (AUC 0.922). P-tau and VILIP-1 
were highly correlated (r = 0.639, p < 0.001) and strongly associated with Aβ 
pathology across clinical stages of AD, while YKL-40 was correlated with Aβ 
pathology in CN and AD groups. VILIP-1 was associated with acceleration of 
cognitive decline, hippocampal atrophy, and expansion of ventricles in 
longitudinal analyses. YKL-40 was associated with hippocampal atrophy at 
baseline and follow-up, while p-tau was only associated with worsening WMH at 
baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF levels of p-tau, VILIP-1, and YKL-40 may have utility for 
discriminating between cognitively normal subjects and patients with AD. 
Increased levels of both VILIP-1 and YKL-40 may be associated with disease 
degeneration. These CSF biomarkers should be considered for future assessment in 
the characterization of the natural history of AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-018-0127-7
PMCID: PMC6161434
PMID: 30311914

Conflict of interest statement: The ADNI study was approved by the Institutional 
Review boards of all of the participating institutions. All participants 
provided informed consent at each site.Not applicable.The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


201. Arch Neurol. 2011 Jan;68(1):58-66. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.343.

Treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine of patients in the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Schneider LS(1), Insel PS, Weiner MW; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Behavioral Sciences, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. lschneid@usc.edu

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2011 Jan;68(1):19-21. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.344.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical characteristics and course of patients with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and mild Alzheimer disease (AD) treated with 
cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) and memantine hydrochloride.
DESIGN: Cohort study.
SETTING: The 59 recruiting sites for the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).
PARTICIPANTS: Outpatients with MCI and AD in ADNI.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The AD Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog), 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and 
Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ).
RESULTS: A total of 177 (44.0%) of 402 MCI patients and 159 (84.6%) of 188 
mild-AD patients were treated with ChEIs and 11.4% of MCI patients and 45.7% of 
AD patients with memantine at entry. Mild-cognitive-impairment patients who 
received ChEIs with or without memantine were more impaired, showed greater 
decline in scores, and progressed to dementia sooner than patients who did not 
receive ChEIs. Alzheimer-disease patients who received ChEIs and memantine took 
them longer, were more functionally impaired, and showed greater decline on the 
MMSE and CDR (but not on the ADAS-cog or FAQ) than those who received ChEIs 
only.
CONCLUSIONS: Academic physicians frequently prescribe ChEIs and memantine 
earlier than indicated in the US Food and Drug Administration-approved labeling 
to patients who are relatively more severely impaired or who are rapidly 
progressing toward cognitive impairment. The use of these medications in ADNI is 
associated with clinical decline and may affect the interpretation of clinical 
trial outcomes.
STUDY REGISTRATION: clinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00106899.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.343
PMCID: PMC3259850
PMID: 21220675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cogn Neurodyn. 2019 Dec;13(6):513-518. doi: 10.1007/s11571-019-09536-x. Epub 
2019 May 11.

Regulating effect of CBF on memory in cognitively normal older adults with 
different ApoE genotype: the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Wang J(1), Peng G(1), Liu P(1), Tan X(1), Luo B(1)(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003 China.
(2)Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Hangzhou, 310003 China.

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 allele and cerebral blood flow (CBF) changes are 
related to the increased risk of cognitive impairment independently. However, 
whether there are interactions between ApoE ε4 and CBF on memory performance in 
older adults with normal cognition remains unknown. This study determined 
whether the association between CBF and memory performance could be moderated by 
ApoE ε4 within a sample of cognitively normal older adults from the ADNI. 62 
participants, including 23 with ApoE ε4 (ApoE ε4+) and 39 without ApoE ε4 (ApoE 
ε4-), underwent resting CBF measurement and memory testing. CBF was measured by 
arterial spin labeling MRI and memory performance was evaluated by the Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test. By using linear regression models, CBF was 
negatively associated with memory function in ApoE ε4+ group, whereas positively 
in ApoE ε4- group by contrast. This study suggests that different CBF-memory 
relationships can be detected in cognitively normal ApoE ε4 carriers compared to 
ApoE ε4 non-carriers. Associations between hyperperfusion and worse memory 
performance in ApoE ε4 carriers may reflect vascular and/or cellular 
dysfunction.

© Springer Nature B.V. 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s11571-019-09536-x
PMCID: PMC6825072
PMID: 31741688

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


203. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Feb 2;9:13. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00013. 
eCollection 2017.

MRI-Based Classification Models in Prediction of Mild Cognitive Impairment and 
Dementia in Late-Life Depression.

Lebedeva AK(1), Westman E(1), Borza T(2), Beyer MK(3), Engedal K(4), Aarsland 
D(5), Selbaek G(6), Haberg AK(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Centre for Old Age Psychiatric Research, Innlandet Hospital TrustBrumunddal, 
Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
OsloOslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Rikshospitalet Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University HospitalTønsberg, Norway; 
Oslo and Norwegian National Advisory Unit for Aging and HealthTønsberg, Norway.
(5)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska 
InstitutetStockholm, Sweden; Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College LondonLondon, UK; Center 
for Age-Related Medicine, Stavanger University HospitalStavanger, Norway.
(6)Centre for Old Age Psychiatric Research, Innlandet Hospital TrustBrumunddal, 
Norway; Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
OsloOslo, Norway; Department of Geriatric Medicine, Oslo University 
HospitalTønsberg, Norway; Oslo and Norwegian National Advisory Unit for Aging 
and HealthTønsberg, Norway.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and 
TechnologyTrondheim, Norway; Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, St. 
Olav's University HospitalTrondheim, Norway.

Objective: Late-life depression (LLD) is associated with development of 
different types of dementia. Identification of LLD patients, who will develop 
cognitive decline, i.e., the early stage of dementia would help to implement 
interventions earlier. The purpose of this study was to assess whether 
structural brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in LLD patients can predict 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or dementia 1 year prior to the diagnosis. 
Methods: LLD patients underwent brain MRI at baseline and repeated clinical 
assessment after 1-year. Structural brain measurements were obtained using 
Freesurfer software (v. 5.1) from the T1W brain MRI images. MRI-based Random 
Forest classifier was used to discriminate between LLD who developed MCI or 
dementia after 1-year follow-up and cognitively stable LLD. Additionally, a 
previously established Random Forest model trained on 185 patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) vs. 225 cognitively normal elderly from the Alzheimer's 
disease Neuroimaging Initiative was tested on the LLD data set (ADNI model). 
Results: MCI and dementia diagnoses were predicted in LLD patients with 
76%/68%/84% accuracy/sensitivity/specificity. Adding the baseline Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) scores to the models improved 
accuracy/sensitivity/specificity to 81%/75%/86%. The best model predicted MCI 
status alone using MRI and baseline MMSE scores with 
accuracy/sensitivity/specificity of 89%/85%/90%. The most important region for 
all the models was right ventral diencephalon, including hypothalamus. Its 
volume correlated negatively with the number of depressive episodes. ADNI model 
trained on AD vs. Controls using SV could predict MCI-DEM patients with 67% 
accuracy. Conclusion: LDD patients developing MCI and dementia can be 
discriminated from LLD patients remaining cognitively stable with good accuracy 
based on baseline structural MRI alone. Baseline MMSE score improves prediction 
accuracy. Ventral diencephalon, including the hypothalamus might play an 
important role in preservation of cognitive functions in LLD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00013
PMCID: PMC5288688
PMID: 28210220


204. Neuroimage. 2012 Nov 15;63(3):1478-86. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.059. 
Epub 2012 Aug 3.

A computational neurodegenerative disease progression score: method and results 
with the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort.

Jedynak BM(1), Lang A, Liu B, Katz E, Zhang Y, Wyman BT, Raunig D, Jedynak CP, 
Caffo B, Prince JL; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Math and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. bruno.jedynak@jhu.edu

While neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by steady degeneration over 
relatively long timelines, it is widely believed that the early stages are the 
most promising for therapeutic intervention, before irreversible neuronal loss 
occurs. Developing a therapeutic response requires a precise measure of disease 
progression. However, since the early stages are for the most part asymptomatic, 
obtaining accurate measures of disease progression is difficult. Longitudinal 
databases of hundreds of subjects observed during several years with tens of 
validated biomarkers are becoming available, allowing the use of computational 
methods. We propose a widely applicable statistical methodology for creating a 
disease progression score (DPS), using multiple biomarkers, for subjects with a 
neurodegenerative disease. The proposed methodology was evaluated for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) using the publicly available AD Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) database, yielding an Alzheimer's DPS or ADPS score for each subject and 
each time-point in the database. In addition, a common description of biomarker 
changes was produced allowing for an ordering of the biomarkers. The Rey 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test delayed recall was found to be the earliest 
biomarker to become abnormal. The group of biomarkers comprising the volume of 
the hippocampus and the protein concentration amyloid beta and Tau were next in 
the timeline, and these were followed by three cognitive biomarkers. The 
proposed methodology thus has potential to stage individuals according to their 
state of disease progression relative to a population and to deduce common 
behaviors of biomarkers in the disease itself.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.059
PMCID: PMC3472161
PMID: 22885136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 5;6:34567. doi: 10.1038/srep34567.

COMPASS: A computational model to predict changes in MMSE scores 24-months after 
initial assessment of Alzheimer's disease.

Zhu F(1), Panwar B(1), Dodge HH(2)(3), Li H(1), Hampstead BM(4)(5), Albin 
RL(2)(6)(7), Paulson HL(2), Guan Y(1)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology and Michigan Alzheimer's Disease Center, University 
of Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology and Layton Aging and Alzheimer's Disease Center, 
Oregon Health &Science University, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, USA.
(5)Mental Health Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, USA.
(6)Neurology Service &Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Centers, VA Ann 
Arbor Healthcare System, USA.
(7)University of Michigan Udall Center, USA.
(8)Departments of Internal Medicine and Human Genetics, and School of Public 
Health, University of Michigan, USA.
(9)Departments of Internal Medicine and of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, University of Michigan, USA.

We present COMPASS, a COmputational Model to Predict the development of 
Alzheimer's diSease Spectrum, to model Alzheimer's disease (AD) progression. 
This was the best-performing method in recent crowdsourcing benchmark study, 
DREAM Alzheimer's Disease Big Data challenge to predict changes in Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) scores over 24-months using standardized data. In the 
present study, we conducted three additional analyses beyond the DREAM challenge 
question to improve the clinical contribution of our approach, including: (1) 
adding pre-validated baseline cognitive composite scores of ADNI-MEM and 
ADNI-EF, (2) identifying subjects with significant declines in MMSE scores, and 
(3) incorporating SNPs of top 10 genes connected to APOE identified from 
functional-relationship network. For (1) above, we significantly improved 
predictive accuracy, especially for the Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) group. 
For (2), we achieved an area under ROC of 0.814 in predicting significant MMSE 
decline: our model has 100% precision at 5% recall, and 91% accuracy at 10% 
recall. For (3), "genetic only" model has Pearson's correlation of 0.15 to 
predict progression in the MCI group. Even though addition of this limited 
genetic model to COMPASS did not improve prediction of progression of MCI group, 
the predictive ability of SNP information extended beyond well-known APOE 
allele.

DOI: 10.1038/srep34567
PMCID: PMC5050516
PMID: 27703197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Clin Epigenetics. 2020 Jun 15;12(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13148-020-00864-y.

Harnessing peripheral DNA methylation differences in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) to reveal novel biomarkers of disease.

Vasanthakumar A(1), Davis JW(2), Idler K(2), Waring JF(2), Asque E(2), 
Riley-Gillis B(2), Grosskurth S(2), Srivastava G(3), Kim S(4)(5), Nho K(4), 
Nudelman KNH(4)(6), Faber K(6), Sun Y(7)(8), Foroud TM(6), Estrada K(9)(10), 
Apostolova LG(4), Li QS(7)(8), Saykin AJ(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Research Center, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA. 
aparna.vasanthakumar@abbvie.com.
(2)Genomics Research Center, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Exploratory Statistics, AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Center for Neuroimaging, Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(5)Electrical and Computer Engineering, State University of New York, Oswego, 
NY, 13126, USA.
(6)National Centralized Repository for Alzheimer's Disease and Related 
Dementias, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(7)Neuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research & Development, Pennington, 
NJ, 08534, USA.
(8)Research Information Technology, Janssen Research & Development, Pennington, 
NJ, 08534, USA.
(9)Biogen, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(10)Currently at Biomarin Pharmaceuticals, Novato, CA, 94949, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative 
disease impacting an estimated 44 million adults worldwide. The causal pathology 
of AD (accumulation of amyloid-beta and tau), precedes hallmark symptoms of 
dementia by more than a decade, necessitating development of early diagnostic 
markers of disease onset, particularly for new drugs that aim to modify disease 
processes. To evaluate differentially methylated positions (DMPs) as novel 
blood-based biomarkers of AD, we used a subset of 653 individuals with 
peripheral blood (PB) samples in the Alzheimer's disease Neuroimaging Initiative 
(ADNI) consortium. The selected cohort of AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
and age-matched healthy controls (CN) all had imaging, genetics, 
transcriptomics, cerebrospinal protein markers, and comprehensive clinical 
records, providing a rich resource of concurrent multi-omics and phenotypic 
information on a well-phenotyped subset of ADNI participants.
RESULTS: In this manuscript, we report cross-diagnosis differential peripheral 
DNA methylation in a cohort of AD, MCI, and age-matched CN individuals with 
longitudinal DNA methylation measurements. Epigenome-wide association studies 
(EWAS) were performed using a mixed model with repeated measures over time with 
a P value cutoff of 1 × 10-5 to test contrasts of pairwise differential 
peripheral methylation in AD vs CN, AD vs MCI, and MCI vs CN. The most highly 
significant differentially methylated loci also tracked with Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores. Differentially methylated loci were enriched near 
brain and neurodegeneration-related genes (e.g., BDNF, BIN1, APOC1) validated 
using the genotype tissue expression project portal (GTex).
CONCLUSIONS: Our work shows that peripheral differential methylation between 
age-matched subjects with AD relative to healthy controls will provide 
opportunities to further investigate and validate differential methylation as a 
surrogate of disease. Given the inaccessibility of brain tissue, the 
PB-associated methylation marks may help identify the stage of disease and 
progression phenotype, information that would be central to bringing forward 
successful drugs for AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-020-00864-y
PMCID: PMC7294637
PMID: 32539856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AV, JWD, KI, EA, BRG, SG, GS, and JFW are all 
employees of AbbVie and may hold stock. YS, QSL are employees of Janssen, and KE 
was an employee of Biogen.


207. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020 Mar 12;12:38. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00038. 
eCollection 2020.

Association of Plasma Transferrin With Cognitive Decline in Patients With Mild 
Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer's Disease.

Guan J(1), Wang P(2), Lu L(3), Zhao G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Lishui City People's Hospital, Lishui, China.

Objective: The objective of this study was to examine whether plasma transferrin 
levels are associated with longitudinal changes in cognitive performance in 
older individuals with normal cognition (CN), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
and mild Alzheimer's disease (AD). Methods: At baseline, there were a total of 
358 participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
cohort, including 58 older individuals with CN, 198 older individuals with MCI, 
and 102 patients with AD. Linear mixed models were utilized to examine the 
associations of plasma transferrin levels with changes in cognitive performance 
over time after adjustment of several potential covariates. The Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes 
(CDR-SB) were used to examine the global cognition of participants. Results: 
First, no significant differences in the plasma transferrin levels were observed 
across three diagnostic groups. Second, in the cross-sectional analyses, the 
baseline plasma transferrin levels were negatively associated with the MMSE 
scores in the CN group, but not in the MCI or the AD group. Third, in the 
longitudinal analyses, we found that a higher plasma transferrin was associated 
with a steeper cognitive decline in the MCI and AD groups, but not in the CN 
group. Conclusion: Higher plasma transferrin levels were associated with a 
steeper cognitive decline in participants with MCI and AD.

Copyright © 2020 Guan, Wang, Lu and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00038
PMCID: PMC7080847
PMID: 32226377


208. Aging Brain. 2024 Mar 21;5:100114. doi: 10.1016/j.nbas.2024.100114. eCollection 
2024.

Intrinsic functional connectivity strength of SuperAgers in the default mode and 
salience networks: Insights from ADNI.

Keenan HE(1), Czippel A(2), Heydari S(2), Gawryluk JR(2)(3)(4), Mazerolle 
EL(1)(5)(6); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, St. Francis Xavier University, 4130 University 
Avenue, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, 
Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(3)Institute on Aging and Lifelong Health, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty 
Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(4)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, 3800 Finnerty Road, 
Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
(5)Department of Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier University, 4130 
University Avenue, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada.
(6)Department of Biology, St. Francis Xavier University, 4130 University Avenue, 
Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada.

There exists a group of older individuals who appear to be resistant to 
age-related memory decline. These "SuperAgers" have been shown to demonstrate 
preservation of cortical thickness and functional connectivity strength across 
the cortex which positively correlates with memory performance. Over the last 
decade, roughly 30 articles have been published regarding SuperAgers; however, 
to our knowledge, no replications of these studies have been published. The 
current study sought to conceptually replicate Zhang and colleagues' (2020) 
findings that SuperAgers demonstrate stronger intrinsic functional connectivity 
within the default mode (DMN) and salience networks (SN), and that connectivity 
strength within these networks correlates with memory performance. We identified 
20 SuperAgers and 20 matched Normal Agers in the control cohort of the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. We compared the 
functional connectivity strength of the DMN and SN between these groups, and 
used the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) to evaluate correlations 
between functional connectivity and memory performance. Our results did not 
replicate Zhang and colleagues' (2020) results, as we found negligible 
differences between SuperAgers and Normal Agers in the DMN and SN, and no 
significant correlations between functional connectivity and memory performance 
after accounting for multiple comparisons. More replications are needed to 
confirm existing work. In addition, more research with larger SuperAger samples 
and more consistent definitions of SuperAging is needed, so that we can better 
understand this remarkable group of older adults.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbas.2024.100114
PMCID: PMC10973202
PMID: 38550790

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


209. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;2012:483469. doi: 10.1155/2012/483469. Epub 2012 Feb 
1.

A two-study comparison of clinical and MRI markers of transition from mild 
cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Devanand DP(1), Liu X, Brown PJ, Huey ED, Stern Y, Pelton GH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 1051 Riverside Drive, 
Unit 126, New York, NY 10032, USA.

A published predictor model in a single-site cohort study (questionable 
dementia, QD) that contained episodic verbal memory (SRT total recall), 
informant report of function (FAQ), and MRI measures was tested using logistic 
regression and ROC analyses with comparable measures in a second multisite 
cohort study (Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, ADNI). There were 126 
patients in QD and 282 patients in ADNI with MCI followed for 3 years. Within 
each sample, the differences in AUCs between the statistical models were very 
similar. Adding hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volumes to the model 
containing AVLT/SRT, FAQ, age and MMSE increased the area under the curve (AUC) 
in ADNI but not QD, with sensitivity increasing by 2% in ADNI and 2% in QD for a 
fixed specificity of 80%. Conversely, adding episodic verbal memory (SRT/AVLT) 
and FAQ to the model containing age, Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE), hippocampal 
and entorhinal cortex volumes increased the AUC in ADNI and QD, with sensitivity 
increasing by 17% in ADNI and 10% in QD for 80% specificity. The predictor 
models showed similar differences from each other in both studies, supporting 
independent validation. MRI hippocampal and entorhinal cortex volumes showed 
limited added predictive utility to memory and function measures.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/483469
PMCID: PMC3296186
PMID: 22482070


210. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2014 Oct;117(1):13-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.06.004. Epub 2014 Jun 14.

Analysis of sub-anatomic diffusion tensor imaging indices in white matter 
regions of Alzheimer with MMSE score.

Patil RB(1), Ramakrishnan S(2).

Author information:
(1)Non Invasive Imaging and Diagnostics Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering 
Group, Department of Applied Mechanics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address: ravipatil3354@gmail.com.
(2)Non Invasive Imaging and Diagnostics Laboratory, Biomedical Engineering 
Group, Department of Applied Mechanics, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address: sramki@iitm.ac.in.

In this study, an attempt has been made to find the correlation between 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) indices of white matter (WM) regions and mini 
mental state examination (MMSE) score of Alzheimer patients. Diffusion weighted 
images are obtained from the ADNI database. These are preprocessed for eddy 
current correction and removal of non-brain tissue. Fractional anisotropy (FA), 
mean diffusivity (MD), radial diffusivity (RD) and axial diffusivity (DA) 
indices are computed over significant regions (Fornix left, Splenium of corpus 
callosum left, Splenium of corpus callosum right, bilateral genu of the corpus 
callosum) affected by Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology. The correlation is 
computed between diffusion indices of the significant regions and MMSE score 
using linear fit technique so as to find the relation between clinical 
parameters and the image features. Binary classification has been employed using 
support vector machine, decision stumps and simple logistic classifiers on the 
extracted DTI indices along with MMSE score to classify Alzheimer patients from 
healthy controls. It is observed that distinct values of DTI indices exist for 
the range of MMSE score. However, there is no strong correlation (Pearson's 
correlation coefficient 'r' varies from 0.0383 to -0.1924) between the MMSE 
score and the diffusion indices over the significant regions. Further, the 
performance evaluation of classifiers shows 94% accuracy using SVM in 
differentiating AD and control. In isolation clinical and image features can be 
used for prescreening and diagnosis of AD but no sub anatomic region correlation 
exist between these features set. The discussion on the correlation of diffusion 
indices of WM with MMSE score is presented in this study.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2014.06.004
PMID: 24986110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018 Aug 16;10(1):80. doi: 10.1186/s13195-018-0407-6.

Cerebrospinal fluid synaptosomal-associated protein 25 is a key player in 
synaptic degeneration in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang H(1), Therriault J(2), Kang MS(2), Ng KP(3), Pascoal TA(2), Rosa-Neto 
P(2), Gauthier S(4); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400016, China.
(2)The McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)The McGill University Research Centre for Studies in Aging, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada. serge.gauthier@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: There is accumulating evidence that synaptic loss precedes neuronal 
loss and correlates best with impaired memory formation in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25) is 
a newly discovered marker indicating synaptic damage. We here test CSF SNAP-25 
and SNAP-25/amyloid-β42 (Aβ42) ratio as a diagnostic marker for predicting 
cognitive decline and brain structural change in the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database.
METHODS: We stratified 139 participants from the ADNI database into cognitively 
normal (CN; n = 52), stable mild cognitive impairment (sMCI; n = 22), 
progressive MCI (pMCI; n = 47), and dementia due to AD (n = 18). Spearman 
correlation was performed to test the relationships between biomarkers. Overall 
diagnostic accuracy (area under the curve (AUC)) was obtained from receiver 
operating curve (ROC) analyses. Cox proportional hazard models tested the effect 
of CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 measures on the conversion from MCI to AD. 
Relationships between the CSF SNAP-25 levels, SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio, and diagnostic 
groups were tested with linear regressions. Linear mixed-effects models and 
linear regression models were used to evaluate CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 as 
predictors of AD features, including cognition measured by the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and brain structure and white matter hyperintensity (WMH) 
measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
RESULTS: CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 were increased in patients with pMCI and 
AD compared with CN, and in pMCI and AD compared with sMCI. Cognitively normal 
subjects who progressed to MCI or AD during follow-up had increased SNAP-25/Aβ42 
ratio compared with nonprogressors. CSF SNAP-25, especially SNAP-25/Aβ42, offers 
diagnostic utility for pMCI and AD. CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 significantly 
predicted conversion from MCI to AD. In addition, elevated SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio 
was associated with the rate of hippocampal atrophy in pMCI and the rate of 
change of cognitive impairment in CN over the follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that both CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio are 
already increased at the early clinical stage of AD, and indicate the promise of 
CSF SNAP-25 and SNAP-25/Aβ42 ratio as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for 
the earliest symptomatic stage of AD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-018-0407-6
PMCID: PMC6097333
PMID: 30115118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
ADNI study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of all the 
participating institutions. Informed written consent was obtained from all 
subjects at each center. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: All authors approved the final 
manuscript for submission and gave consent for publication. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


212. Front Neurol. 2019 May 15;10:486. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00486. eCollection 
2019.

Quantitative (18)F-AV1451 Brain Tau PET Imaging in Cognitively Normal Older 
Adults, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Alzheimer's Disease Patients.

Zhao Q(1)(2), Liu M(2)(3), Ha L(2)(4), Zhou Y(2)(5); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, 
Jagust W, Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw 
LM, Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies 
P, Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam MM, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Green RC, Montine T, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, 
Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, Balasubramanian AB, Mason J, Sim I, Beckett L, 
Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Franklin E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, 
Korecka M, Figurski M, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin 
S, Shen L, Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, 
Buckholtz N, Weiner MW, Snyder PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, 
Khachaturian Z, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Silbert L, Lind B, Carter R, Dolen S, 
Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Becerra M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, Brewer J, Vanderswag 
H, Fleisher A, Heidebrink JL, Lord JL, Petersen R, Mason SS, Albers CS, Knopman 
D, Johnson K, Doody RS, Villanueva-Meyer J, Pavlik V, Shibley V, Chowdhury M, 
Rountree S, Dang M, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Ances B, Morris JC, Carroll M, 
Creech ML, Franklin E, Mintun MA, Schneider S, Oliver A, Marson D, Geldmacher D, 
Natelson Love M, Griffith R, Clark D, Brockington J, Roberson E, Grossman H, 
Mitsis E, Shah RC, deToledo-Morrell L, Duara R, Greig-Custo MT, Barker W, Albert 
M, Onyike C, D'Agostino D 2nd, Kielb S, Sadowski M, Sheikh MO, Anaztasia U, 
Mrunalini G, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, Borges-Neto S, Wong TZ, Coleman E, 
Arnold SE, Karlawish JH, Wolk DA, Clark CM, Smith CD, Jicha G, Hardy P, Sinha P, 
Oates E, Conrad G, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM, Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein 
BS, Martin K, Makino KM, Ismail MS, Brand C, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, 
Womack K, Mathews D, Quiceno M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Cellar JS, Burns JM, Swerdlow 
RH, Brooks WM, Apostolova L, Tingus K, Woo E, Silverman DH, Lu PH, Bartzokis G, 
Graff-Radford NR, Parfitt F, Poki-Walker K, Farlow MR, Hake AM, Matthews BR, 
Brosch JR, Herring S, van Dyck CH, Carson RE, MacAvoy MG, Varma P, Chertkow H, 
Bergman H, Hosein C, Black S, Stefanovic B, Caldwell C, Hsiung GR, Mudge B, 
Sossi V, Feldman H, Assaly M, Finger E, Pasternack S, Rachisky I, Trost D, 
Kertesz A, Bernick C, Munic D, Mesulam MM, Rogalski E, Lipowski K, Weintraub S, 
Bonakdarpour B, Kerwin D, Wu CK, Johnson N, Sadowsky C, Villena T, Turner RS, 
Johnson K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson KA, Marshall G, Yesavage J, Taylor 
JL, Lane B, Rosen A, Tinklenberg J, Sabbagh MN, Belden CM, Jacobson SA, Sirrel 
SA, Kowall N, Killiany R, Budson AE, Norbash A, Johnson PL, Obisesan TO, Wolday 
S, Allard J, Lerner A, Ogrocki P, Tatsuoka C, Fatica P, Fletcher E, Maillard P, 
Olichney J, DeCarli C, Carmichael O, Kittur S, Borrie M, Lee TY, Bartha R, 
Johnson S, Asthana S, Carlsson CM, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Tariot P, Burke 
A, Milliken AM, Trncic N, Fleisher A, Reeder S, Bates V, Capote H, Rainka M, 
Scharre DW, Kataki M, Kelley B, Zimmerman EA, Celmins D, Brown AD, Pearlson GD, 
Blank K, Anderson K, Flashman LA, Seltzer M, Hynes ML, Santulli RB, Sink KM, 
Leslie G, Williamson JD, Garg P, Watkins F, Ott BR, Tremont G, Daiello LA, 
Salloway S, Malloy P, Correia S, Rosen HJ, Miller BL, Perry D, Mintzer J, Spicer 
K, Bachman D, Finger E, Pasternak S, Rachinsky I, Rogers J, Kertesz A, Drost D, 
Pomara N, Hernando R, Sarrael A, Schultz SK, Smith KE, Koleva H, Nam KW, Shim H, 
Relkin N, Chiang G, Lin M, Ravdin L, Smith A, Raj BA, Fargher K, Weiner MW, 
Aisen P, Weiner M, Aisen P, Petersen R, Green RC, Harvey D, Jack CR Jr, Jagust 
W, Morris JC, Saykin AJ, Shaw LM, Toga AW, Trojanowki JQ, Neylan T, Grafman J, 
Green RC, Montine T, Weiner M, Petersen R, Aisen P, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Devon 
G, Sather T, Melissa D, Morrison R, Jiminez G, Neylan T, Jacqueline H, Shannon 
F, Harvey D, Donohue M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, 
Kejal K, Chad W, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Landau S, 
Morris JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Shaw LM, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka M, 
Figurski M, Toga AW, Karen C, Scott N, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, 
Faber K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Karl F, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Mauricio B, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H, Stern Y, Honig LS, Bell KL, Fleischman D, Arfanakis K, 
Shah RC, Duara R, Varon D, Greig MT, Doraiswamy PM, Petrella JR, James O, 
Porsteinsson AP, Goldstein B, Martin KS, Potkin SG, Preda A, Nguyen D, Mintzer 
J, Massoglia D, Brawman-Mintzer O, Sadowsky C, Martinez W, Villena T, Jagust W, 
Landau S, Rosen H, Perry D, Turner RS, Behan K, Reynolds B, Sperling RA, Johnson 
KA, Marshall G, Sabbagh MN, Jacobson SA, Sirrel SA, Obisesan TO, Wolday S, 
Allard J, Johnson SC, Fruehling JJ, Harding S, Peskind ER, Petrie EC, Li G, 
Yesavage JA, Taylor JL, Furst AJ, Chao S, Relkin N, Chiang G, Ravdin L, Ravdin 
L, Mackin S, Aisen P, Raman R, Mackin S, Weiner M, Aisen P, Raman R, Jack CR Jr, 
Landau S, Saykin AJ, Toga AW, DeCarli C, Koeppe RA, Green RC, Drake E, Weiner M, 
Aisen P, Raman R, Donohue M, Jimenez G, Gessert D, Harless K, Salazar J, Cabrera 
Y, Walter S, Hergesheimer L, Shaffer E, Mackin S, Nelson C, Bickford D, Butters 
M, Zmuda M, Jack CR Jr, Bernstein M, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Kantarci K, 
Ward C, Reyes D, Koeppe RA, Landau S, Toga AW, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, 
Foroud TM, Faber KM, Nho K, Nudelman KN, Mackin S, Rosen H, Nelson C, Bickford 
D, Au YH, Scherer K, Catalinotto D, Stark S, Ong E, Fernandez D, Butters M, 
Zmuda M, Lopez OL, Oakley M, Simpson DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, China.
(2)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(3)Department of Radiology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Reproductive Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, China.
(5)Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University in St. Louis 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.

Recent developments of tau Positron Emission Tomography (PET) allows assessment 
of regional neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) deposition in human brain. Among the 
tau PET molecular probes, 18F-AV1451 is characterized by high selectivity for 
pathologic tau aggregates over amyloid plaques, limited non-specific binding in 
white and gray matter, and confined off-target binding. The objectives of the 
study are (1) to quantitatively characterize regional brain tau deposition 
measured by 18F-AV1451 PET in cognitively normal older adults (CN), mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), and AD participants; (2) to evaluate the 
correlations between cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers or Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and 18F-AV1451 PET standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR); 
and (3) to evaluate the partial volume effects on 18F-AV1451 brain uptake. 
Methods: The study included total 115 participants (CN = 49, MCI = 58, and AD = 
8) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Preprocessed 
18F-AV1451 PET images, structural MRIs, and demographic and clinical assessments 
were downloaded from the ADNI database. A reblurred Van Cittertiteration method 
was used for voxelwise partial volume correction (PVC) on PET images. Structural 
MRIs were used for PET spatial normalization and region of interest (ROI) 
definition in standard space. The parametric images of 18F-AV1451 SUVR relative 
to cerebellum were calculated. The ROI SUVR measurements from PVC and non-PVC 
SUVR images were compared. The correlation between ROI 18F-AV1451 SUVR and the 
measurements of MMSE, CSF total tau (t-tau), and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) were 
also assessed. Results: 18F-AV1451 prominently specific binding was found in the 
amygdala, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampus, fusiform, posterior cingulate, 
temporal, parietal, and frontal brain regions. Most regional SUVRs showed 
significantly higher uptake of 18F-AV1451 in AD than MCI and CN participants. 
SUVRs of small regions like amygdala, entorhinal cortex and parahippocampus were 
statistically improved by PVC in all groups (p < 0.01). Although there was an 
increasing tendency of 18F-AV-1451 SUVRs in MCI group compared with CN group, no 
significant difference of 18F-AV1451 deposition was found between CN and MCI 
brains with or without PVC (p > 0.05). Declined MMSE score was observed with 
increasing 18F-AV1451 binding in amygdala, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampus, 
and fusiform. CSF p-tau was positively correlated with 18F-AV1451 deposition. 
PVC improved the results of 18F-AV-1451 tau deposition and correlation studies 
in small brain regions. Conclusion: The typical deposition of 18F-AV1451 tau PET 
imaging in AD brain was found in amygdala, entorhinal cortex, fusiform and 
parahippocampus, and these regions were strongly associated with cognitive 
impairment and CSF biomarkers. Although more deposition was observed in MCI 
group, the 18F-AV-1451 PET imaging could not differentiate the MCI patients from 
CN population. More tau deposition related to decreased MMSE score and increased 
level of CSF p-tau, especially in ROIs of amygdala, entorhinal cortex and 
parahippocampus. PVC did improve the results of tau deposition and correlation 
studies in small brain regions and suggest to be routinely used in 18F-AV1451 
tau PET quantification.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00486
PMCID: PMC6530456
PMID: 31156534


213. Quant Imaging Med Surg. 2018 Nov;8(10):1004-1019. doi: 10.21037/qims.2018.10.08.

The structural MRI markers and cognitive decline in prodromal Alzheimer's 
disease: a 2-year longitudinal study.

Wei H(1), Kong M(2), Zhang C(1), Guan L(1), Ba M(1); for Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative*.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital of 
Qingdao University, Yantai 264000, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai 264000, China.

BACKGROUND: Being clinically diagnosed with a mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
due to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is widely studied. Yet, the clinical and 
structural neuroimaging characteristics for prodromal AD, which are defined as 
A+T+MCI based on the AT (N) system are still highly desirable. This study 
evaluates the differences of the cognitive assessments and structural magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) between the early MCI (EMCI) and late MCI (LMCI) 
participants based on the AT (N) system. The potential clinical value of the 
structural MRI as a predictor of cognitive decline during follow-up in prodromal 
AD is further investigated.
METHODS: A total of 406 MCI participants from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database were chosen and dichotomized into EMCI 
and LMCI groups according to the Second Edition (Logical Memory II) Wechsler 
Memory Scale. Multiple markers' data was collected, including age, sex, years of 
education, ApoE4 status, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, standardized 
uptake values ratios (SUVR) means of florbetapir-PET-AV45, cognitive measures, 
and structural MRI. We chose 197 A+T+MCI participants (prodromal AD) with 
positive biomarkers of Aβ plaques (labeled "A") and fibrillar tau (labeled "T"). 
We diagnosed Aβ plaques positive by the SUVR means of florbetapir-PET-AV45 
(cut-off >1.1) and fibrillar tau positive by CSF phosphorylated-tau at threonine 
181 (p-tau) (cut-off >23 pg/mL). The differences of cognitive assessments and 
regions of interest (ROIs) defined on the MRI template between EMCI and LMCI 
were compared. Furthermore, the potential clinical utility of the MRI as the 
predictor of cognitive decline in prodromal AD was evaluated by investigating 
the relationship between baseline MRI markers and cognition decline at the 
follow-up period, through a linear regression model.
RESULTS: The LMCI participants had a significantly more amyloid burden and CSF 
levels of total t-tau than the EMCI participants. The LMCI participants scored a 
lower result than the EMCI group in the global cognition scales and subscales 
which included tests for memory, delayed recall memory, executive function, 
language, attention and visuospatial skills. The cognition levels declined 
faster in the LMCI participants during the 12- and 24-month follow-up. There 
were significant differences in ROIs on the structural MRI between the two 
groups, including a bilateral entorhinal, a bilateral hippocampus, a bilateral 
amygdala, a bilateral lateral ventricle and cingulate, a corpus callosum, and a 
left temporal. The thickness average of the left entorhinal, the left middle 
temporal, the left superior temporal, and the right isthmus cingulate was a main 
contributor to the decreased global cognition levels. The thickness average of 
the left superior temporal and bilateral entorhinal played a key role in the 
memory domain decline. The thickness average of the left middle temporal, and 
the right isthmus cingulate was significantly associated with an executive 
function decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the AT (N) system, surely, both the EMCI and LMCI 
diagnoses presented significant differences in multiple cognition domains. 
Signature ROIs from the structural MRI tests had correlated a cognitive decline, 
and could act as one potential predictive marker.

DOI: 10.21037/qims.2018.10.08
PMCID: PMC6288054
PMID: 30598878

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.


214. J Alzheimers Dis Rep. 2020 Feb 28;4(1):49-59. doi: 10.3233/ADR-190149.

Identification of Superficial White Matter Abnormalities in Alzheimer's Disease 
and Mild Cognitive Impairment Using Diffusion Tensor Imaging.

Bigham B(1), Zamanpour SA(1), Zemorshidi F(2), Boroumand F(3), Zare H(1)(4); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Neurology, Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Student Research Committee, Social Determinants of Health Research Center, 
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Medical Physics Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) estimates the microstructural 
alterations of the brain, as a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based 
neuroimaging technique. Prior DTI studies reported decreased structural 
integrity of the superficial white matter (SWM) in the brain diseases.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to determine the diffusion characteristics of SWM in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) using tractography 
and region of interest (ROI) approaches.
METHODS: The diffusion MRI data were downloaded from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database on 24 patients with AD, 24 with MCI, and 
24 normal control (NC) subjects. DTI processing was performed using DSI Studio 
software. First, for ROI-based analysis, The superficial white matter was 
divided into right and left frontal, parietal, temporal, insula, limbic and 
occipital regions by the Talairach Atlas, Then, for tractography-based analysis, 
the tractography of each of these regions was performed with 100000 seeds. 
Finally, the average diffusion values were extracted from voxels within the ROIs 
and tracts.
RESULTS: Both tractography and ROI analyses showed a significant difference in 
radial, axial and mean diffusivity values between the three groups (p < 0.05) 
across most of the SWM. Furthermore, The Mini-Mental State Examination was 
significantly correlated with radial, axial, and mean diffusivity values in 
parietal and temporal lobes SWM in the AD group (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: DTI provided information indicating microstructural changes in the 
SWM of patients with AD and MCI. Therefore, assessment of the SWM using DTI may 
be helpful for the clinical diagnosis of patients with AD and MCI.

© 2020 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3233/ADR-190149
PMCID: PMC7081087
PMID: 32206757

Conflict of interest statement: The authors disclose no conflicts of interest.


215. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2011 Mar 21;3(2):9. doi: 10.1186/alzrt68.

For debate: substituting placebo controls in long-term Alzheimer's prevention 
trials.

Spiegel R(1), Berres M, Miserez AR, Monsch AU; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Department of Geriatrics, Memory Clinic, Schanzenstrasse 
55, CH 4031 Basel, Switzerland. rene.spiegel@unibas.ch.

INTRODUCTION: Novel compounds with potential to attenuate or stop the 
progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD) from its presymptomatic stage to 
dementia are being tested in man. The study design commonly used is the 
long-term randomized, placebo-controlled trial (RPCT), meaning that many 
patients will receive placebo for 18 months or longer. It is ethically 
problematic to expose presymptomatic AD patients, who by definition are at risk 
of developing dementia, to prolonged placebo treatment. As an alternative to 
long-term RPCTs we propose a novel clinical study design, termed the placebo 
group simulation approach (PGSA), using mathematical models to forecast outcomes 
of presymptomatic AD patients from their own baseline data. Forecasted outcomes 
are compared with outcomes observed on candidate drugs, thus replacing a 
concomitant placebo group.
METHODS: First models were constructed using mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. One 
outcome is the Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale - cognitive subscale (ADAScog) 
score after 24 months, predicted in a linear regression model; the other is the 
trajectory over 36 months of a composite neuropsychological test score 
(Neuro-Psychological Battery (NP-Batt)), using a mixed model. Demographics and 
clinical, biological and neuropsychological baseline values were tested as 
potential predictors in both models.
RESULTS: ADAScog scores after 24 months are predicted from gender, obesity, 
Functional Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ) and baseline scores of Mini-Mental 
State Examination, ADAScog and NP-Batt with an R2 of 0.63 and a residual 
standard deviation of 0.67, allowing reasonably precise estimates of sample 
means. The model of the NP-Batt trajectory has random intercepts and slopes and 
fixed effects for body mass index, time, apolipoprotein E4, age, FAQ, baseline 
scores of ADAScog and NP-Batt, and four interaction terms. Estimates of the 
residual standard deviation range from 0.3 to 0.5 on a standard normal scale. If 
novel drug candidates are expected to diminish the negative slope of scores with 
time, a change of 0.04 per year could be detected in samples of 400 with a power 
of about 80%.
CONCLUSIONS: First PGSA models derived from ADNI MCI data allow prediction of 
cognitive endpoints and trajectories that correspond well with real observed 
values. Corroboration of these models with data from other observational studies 
is ongoing. It is suggested that the PGSA may complement RPCT designs in 
forthcoming long-term drug studies with presymptomatic AD individuals.

DOI: 10.1186/alzrt68
PMCID: PMC3226271
PMID: 21418632


216. J Integr Neurosci. 2024 Dec 23;23(12):220. doi: 10.31083/j.jin2312220.

The Correlations between Volume Loss of Temporal and Subcortical Functional 
Subregions and Cognitive Impairment at Various Stages of Cognitive Decline.

Lu F(1), Shi C(2), Rao D(1), Yue W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, 637000 Nanchong, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Qionglai Medical Centre Hospital, 611530 Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between subregion atrophy in the entire temporal 
lobe and subcortical nuclei and cognitive decline at various stages of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is unclear.
METHODS: We selected 711 participants from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) 
database, which included 195 cases of cognitively normal (CN), 271 cases of 
early Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (EMCI), 132 cases of late MCI (LMCI), and 
113 cases of AD. we looked at how subregion atrophy in the temporal lobe and 
subcortical nuclei correlated with cognition at different stages of AD. The 
volume of the subregions was measured from the human Brainnetome atlas (BNA-246) 
using voxel-based morphometry and discriminant and correlation analyses were 
performed.
RESULTS: Only the left premotor thalamus demonstrated significant shrinkage in 
individuals with EMCI (p = 0.012). Discriminant analysis revealed that the left 
rostral Brodmann area 20 has the highest discriminatory ability among all 
temporal subregions to distinguish patients with AD from CN. While the left 
caudal hippocampus can efficiently distinguish patients with LMCI from EMCI. 
While the right rostral Brodmann area 20 was the most effective in 
distinguishing AD from LMCI. Correlation analysis revealed that the left nucleus 
accumbens, left caudal area 35/36, and left sensory thalamus had a mild 
correlation with cognitive scores measured using the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale-Cognitive (ADAS-cog) 13 and Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that the right rostral area 20 in the inferior 
temporal gyrus plays a significant role in cognitive impairment in AD.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.jin2312220
PMID: 39735962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Neuroimaging. 2015 Sep-Oct;25(5):728-37. doi: 10.1111/jon.12252. Epub 2015 May 
4.

Structural Brain Changes in Early-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Subjects Using the 
LONI Pipeline Environment.

Moon SW(1), Dinov ID(2)(3), Hobel S(2), Zamanyan A(2), Choi YC(4), Shi R(2), 
Thompson PM(2), Toga AW(2); Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
143-701, Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Institute for Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck 
School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
90032.
(3)University of Michigan, School of Nursing, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109.
(4)Department of Radiology, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
143-701, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: This study investigates 36 subjects aged 55-65 from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database to expand our 
knowledge of early-onset (EO) Alzheimer's Disease (EO-AD) using neuroimaging 
biomarkers.
METHODS: Nine of the subjects had EO-AD, and 27 had EO mild cognitive impairment 
(EO-MCI). The structural ADNI data were parcellated using BrainParser, and the 
15 most discriminating neuroimaging markers between the two cohorts were 
extracted using the Global Shape Analysis (GSA) Pipeline workflow. Then the 
Local Shape Analysis (LSA) Pipeline workflow was used to conduct local 
(per-vertex) post-hoc statistical analyses of the shape differences based on the 
participants' diagnoses (EO-MCI+EO-AD). Tensor-based Morphometry (TBM) and 
multivariate regression models were used to identify the significance of the 
structural brain differences based on the participants' diagnoses.
RESULTS: The significant between-group regional differences using GSA were found 
in 15 neuroimaging markers. The results of the LSA analysis workflow were based 
on the subject diagnosis, age, years of education, apolipoprotein E (ε4), 
Mini-Mental State Examination, visiting times, and logical memory as regressors. 
All the variables had significant effects on the regional shape measures. Some 
of these effects survived the false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Similarly, 
the TBM analysis showed significant effects on the Jacobian displacement vector 
fields, but these effects were reduced after FDR correction.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may explain some of the differences between EO-AD and 
EO-MCI, and some of the characteristics of the EO cognitive impairment subjects.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.12252
PMCID: PMC4537660
PMID: 25940587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Psychiatr Res. 2024 Mar;171:296-305. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2024.01.038. 
Epub 2024 Jan 23.

Longitudinal trajectory effects of different MCI subtypes on general cognitive 
and daily functions in a population-based cohort of older adults.

Yuan M(1), Long X(1), Zhang Z(1), Rong M(1), Lian S(1), Peng Y(2), Fang Y(3); 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment of Fujian Province, School of 
Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China; Center for Aging and Health 
Research, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. Electronic 
address: fangya@xmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: To identify different mild cognitive impairment (MCI) phenotypes 
based on substantial relative impairment in specific cognitive domains and then 
characterize the complex process of general cognitive and daily functions over 
time in older adults with these MCI subtypes.
METHODS: A total of 1020 participants with MCI at baseline from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) were recruited. MCI subtypes were 
obtained based on neuropsychological tests in five cognitive domains: memory 
(M), visuospatial function (V), language (L), processing speed (P), and 
executive function (E). General cognitive function and daily function were 
measured by the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Functional 
Assessment Questionnaire (FAQ), respectively. Linear mixed models were fitted to 
curve their trajectories across different MCI subtypes.
RESULTS: Considering visuospatial function, subtypes were MO (memory impaired 
only), M&V (memory and visuospatial function impaired) and M&nV (memory impaired 
and visuospatial function non-impaired). Similar subtypes and naming rules were 
obtained based on language, executive function, and processing speed. Further, 
depending on the number of relative impaired cognitive domains M&S and M&M were 
obtained. Participants with MO had the highest prevalence in the sample 
(53.4 %), followed by M&nV (31.1 %). Participants with M&V had the highest mean 
age (74.69 years) at baseline and the greatest dementia conversion rate 
(53.2 %). The MMSE and FAQ score trajectories changed most slowly in 
participants with MO while fastest in those with M&V. Obvious different 
trajectories of both MMSE and FAQ scores were observed across different subtypes 
based on visuospatial function and executive function.
CONCLUSION: Compared to MO, individuals with multi-dimensional cognitive 
impairment have worse general cognitive and daily functions, especially for 
those with M&V.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2024.01.038
PMID: 38335640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


219. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2014 May 24;10:929-52. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S62323. 
eCollection 2014.

Disease progression model for Clinical Dementia Rating-Sum of Boxes in mild 
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Samtani MN(1), Raghavan N(1), Novak G(1), Nandy P(1), Narayan VA(1).

Author information:
(1)Janssen Research and Development, LLC, Raritan, New Jersey, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this analysis was to develop a nonlinear disease 
progression model, using an expanded set of covariates that captures the 
longitudinal Clinical Dementia Rating Scale-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) scores. These 
were derived from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative ADNI-1 study, 
of 301 Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment patients who were 
followed for 2-3 years.
METHODS: The model describes progression rate and baseline disease score as a 
function of covariates. The covariates that were tested fell into five groups: 
a) hippocampal volume; b) serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers; c) 
demographics and apolipoprotein Epsilon 4 (ApoE4) allele status; d) baseline 
cognitive tests; and e) disease state and comedications.
RESULTS: Covariates associated with baseline disease severity were disease 
state, hippocampal volume, and comedication use. Disease progression rate was 
influenced by baseline CSF biomarkers, Trail-Making Test part A score, delayed 
logical memory test score, and current level of impairment as measured by 
CDR-SB. The rate of disease progression was dependent on disease severity, with 
intermediate scores around the inflection point score of 10 exhibiting high 
disease progression rate. The CDR-SB disease progression rate in a typical 
patient, with late mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer's disease, was 
estimated to be approximately 0.5 and 1.4 points/year, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this model describes disease progression in terms of 
CDR-SB changes in patients and its dependency on novel covariates. The CSF 
biomarkers included in the model discriminate mild cognitive impairment subjects 
as progressors and nonprogressors. Therefore, the model may be utilized for 
optimizing study designs, through patient population enrichment and clinical 
trial simulations.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S62323
PMCID: PMC4049432
PMID: 24926196


220. Neurol Sci. 2024 Mar;45(3):1041-1050. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-07076-1. Epub 2023 
Sep 28.

Association of APOE gene with longitudinal changes of CSF amyloid beta and tau 
levels in Alzheimer's disease: racial differences.

Xu C(1), Xiao D(2), Su BB(3), Saveron JM(1), Gamez D(1), Navia RO(4), Wang N(5), 
Roy U(1), Adjeroh DA(6), Wang K(7); Alzheimer and Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Professions, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX, 78520, USA.
(2)Department of STEM, School of Arts and Sciences, Regis College, Weston, MA, 
02493, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics - Allergy and Immunology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine and Rockefeller Neuroscience Institute, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA.
(6)Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, West Virginia 
University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA.
(7)Department of Family and Community Health, School of Nursing, Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, 26506, USA. 
kesheng.wang@hsc.wvu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is a risk factor for 
late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, no investigation has focused on 
racial differences in the longitudinal effect of APOE genotypes on CSF amyloid 
beta (Aβ42) and tau levels in AD.
METHODS: This study used data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI): 222 participants with AD, 264 with cognitive normal (CN), and 
692 with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at baseline and two years follow-up. We 
used a linear mixed model to investigate the effect of APOE-ε4-genotypes on 
longitudinal changes in the amyloid beta and tau levels.
RESULTS: Individuals with 1 or 2 APOE ε4 alleles revealed significantly higher 
t-Tau and p-Tau, but lower amyloid beta Aβ42 compared with individuals without 
APOE ε4 alleles. Significantly higher levels of log-t-Tau, log-p-Tau, and low 
levels of log-Aβ42 were observed in the subjects with older age, being female, 
and the two diagnostic groups (AD and MCI). The higher p-Tau and Aβ42 values are 
associated with poor Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) performance. 
Non-Hispanic Africa American (AA) and Hispanic participants were associated with 
decreased log-t-Tau levels (β =  - 0.154, p = 0.0112; β =  - 0.207, and 
p = 0.0016, respectively) as compared to those observed in Whites. Furthermore, 
Hispanic participants were associated with a decreased log-p-Tau level 
(β =  - 0.224, p = 0.0023) compared to those observed in Whites. There were no 
differences in Aβ42 level for non-Hispanic AA and Hispanic participants compared 
with White participants.
CONCLUSION: Our study, for the first time, showed that the APOE ε4 allele was 
associated with these biomarkers, however with differing degrees among racial 
groups.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-07076-1
PMID: 37759100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 31;12(10):e0187364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187364. 
eCollection 2017.

Using redescription mining to relate clinical and biological characteristics of 
cognitively impaired and Alzheimer's disease patients.

Mihelčić M(1)(2), Šimić G(3), Babić Leko M(3), Lavrač N(2)(4), Džeroski S(2)(4), 
Šmuc T(1); Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Division of Electronics, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Department for Neuroscience, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, 
University of Zagreb Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)Department of Knowledge Technologies, Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

Based on a set of subjects and a collection of attributes obtained from the 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database, we used redescription 
mining to find interpretable rules revealing associations between those 
determinants that provide insights about the Alzheimer's disease (AD). We 
extended the CLUS-RM redescription mining algorithm to a constraint-based 
redescription mining (CBRM) setting, which enables several modes of targeted 
exploration of specific, user-constrained associations. Redescription mining 
enabled finding specific constructs of clinical and biological attributes that 
describe many groups of subjects of different size, homogeneity and levels of 
cognitive impairment. We confirmed some previously known findings. However, in 
some instances, as with the attributes: testosterone, ciliary neurotrophic 
factor, brain natriuretic peptide, Fas ligand, the imaging attribute Spatial 
Pattern of Abnormalities for Recognition of Early AD, as well as the levels of 
leptin and angiopoietin-2 in plasma, we corroborated previously debatable 
findings or provided additional information about these variables and their 
association with AD pathogenesis. Moreover, applying redescription mining on 
ADNI data resulted with the discovery of one largely unknown attribute: the 
Pregnancy-Associated Protein-A (PAPP-A), which we found highly associated with 
cognitive impairment in AD. Statistically significant correlations (p ≤ 0.01) 
were found between PAPP-A and clinical tests: Alzheimer's Disease Assessment 
Scale, Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes, Mini Mental State Examination, 
etc. The high importance of this finding lies in the fact that PAPP-A is a 
metalloproteinase, known to cleave insulin-like growth factor binding proteins. 
Since it also shares similar substrates with A Disintegrin and the 
Metalloproteinase family of enzymes that act as α-secretase to physiologically 
cleave amyloid precursor protein (APP) in the non-amyloidogenic pathway, it 
could be directly involved in the metabolism of APP very early during the 
disease course. Therefore, further studies should investigate the role of PAPP-A 
in the development of AD more thoroughly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187364
PMCID: PMC5663625
PMID: 29088293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


222. J Nucl Med. 2011 Aug;52(8):1218-26. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.111.090902. Epub 2011 
Jul 15.

Evaluation of a calibrated (18)F-FDG PET score as a biomarker for progression in 
Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment.

Herholz K(1), Westwood S, Haense C, Dunn G.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, School of Cancer and Enabling Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. karl.herholz@manchester.ac.uk

Increasingly, clinical trials are being planned in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) to prevent or delay the onset of dementia in Alzheimer disease 
(AD) by disease-modifying intervention. Inclusion of imaging techniques as 
biomarkers for patient selection and assessment of outcome is expected to 
increase trial efficacy. PET using (18)F-FDG provides objective information 
about the impairment of synaptic function and could, with appropriate 
standardization, qualify as a biomarker.
METHODS: We evaluated a predefined quantitative measure (PET score) that is 
extracted automatically from (18)F-FDG PET scans using a sample of controls (n = 
44), patients with MCI (n = 94), and patients with mild AD (n = 40) from the 
Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Subjects received 4 scans and 
clinical assessments over 2 y.
RESULTS: PET scores provide much higher test-retest reliability than standard 
neuropsychologic test scores (Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive 
[ADAS-cog] and Mini-Mental State Examination) and superior signal strength for 
measuring progression. At the same time, they are related linearly to ADAS-cog 
scores, thus providing a valid measure of cognitive impairment. In addition, PET 
scores at study entry in MCI patients significantly predict clinical progression 
to dementia with a higher accuracy than Mini-Mental State Examination and 
ADAS-cog.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FDG PET scores are a valid imaging biomarker to monitor the 
progression of MCI to AD. Their superior test-retest reliability and signal 
strength will allow the reduction in the number of subjects needed or shortening 
of study duration substantially.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.111.090902
PMID: 21764801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Neuroimage. 2010 Aug 1;52(1):109-18. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.006. Epub 
2010 Apr 9.

Measurement of hippocampal atrophy using 4D graph-cut segmentation: application 
to ADNI.

Wolz R(1), Heckemann RA, Aljabar P, Hajnal JV, Hammers A, Lötjönen J, Rueckert 
D; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
r.wolz@imperial.ac.uk

We propose a new method of measuring atrophy of brain structures by 
simultaneously segmenting longitudinal magnetic resonance (MR) images. In this 
approach a 4D graph is used to represent the longitudinal data: edges are 
weighted based on spatial and intensity priors and connect spatially and 
temporally neighboring voxels represented by vertices in the graph. Solving the 
min-cut/max-flow problem on this graph yields the segmentation for all 
timepoints in a single step. By segmenting all timepoints simultaneously, a 
consistent and atrophy-sensitive segmentation is obtained. The application to 
hippocampal atrophy measurement in 568 image pairs (Baseline and Month 12 
follow-up) as well as 362 image triplets (Baseline, Month 12, and Month 24) from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) confirms previous 
findings for atrophy in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and healthy aging. Highly 
significant correlations between hippocampal atrophy and clinical variables 
(Mini Mental State Examination, MMSE and Clinical Dementia Rating, CDR) were 
found and atrophy rates differ significantly according to subjects' ApoE 
genotype. Based on one year atrophy rates, a correct classification rate of 82% 
between AD and control subjects is achieved. Subjects that converted from Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (MCI) to AD after the period for which atrophy was measured 
(i.e., after the first 12 months) and subjects for whom conversion is yet to be 
identified were discriminated with a rate of 64%, a promising result with a view 
to clinical application. Power analysis shows that 67 and 206 subjects are 
needed for the AD and MCI groups respectively to detect a 25% change in volume 
loss with 80% power and 5% significance.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.006
PMID: 20382238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Jan;36 Suppl 1:S178-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.043. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

A computational method for computing an Alzheimer's disease progression score; 
experiments and validation with the ADNI data set.

Jedynak BM(1), Liu B(2), Lang A(3), Gel Y(4), Prince JL(3); Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Center for Imaging Science, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Laboratoire de Mathématiques Paul Painlevé, Université des 
Sciences et Technologies de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. Electronic 
address: bruno.jedynak@jhu.edu.
(2)Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University 
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

Understanding the time-dependent changes of biomarkers related to Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) is a key to assessing disease progression and measuring the 
outcomes of disease-modifying therapies. In this article, we validate an AD 
progression score model which uses multiple biomarkers to quantify the AD 
progression of subjects following 3 assumptions: (1) there is a unique disease 
progression for all subjects; (2) each subject has a different age of onset and 
rate of progression; and (3) each biomarker is sigmoidal as a function of 
disease progression. Fitting the parameters of this model is a challenging 
problem which we approach using an alternating least squares optimization 
algorithm. To validate this optimization scheme under realistic conditions, we 
use the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative cohort. With the help of 
Monte Carlo simulations, we show that most of the global parameters of the model 
are tightly estimated, thus enabling an ordering of the biomarkers that fit the 
model well, ordered as: the Rey auditory verbal learning test with 30 minutes 
delay, the sum of the 2 lateral hippocampal volumes divided by the intracranial 
volume, followed (by the clinical dementia rating sum of boxes score and the 
mini-mental state examination score) in no particular order and at last the AD 
assessment scale-cognitive subscale.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.043
PMCID: PMC4267989
PMID: 25444605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2013 Sep;40(9):1394-405. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-013-2458-z. Epub 2013 May 29.

Automated analysis of FDG PET as a tool for single-subject probabilistic 
prediction and detection of Alzheimer's disease dementia.

Arbizu J(1), Prieto E, Martínez-Lage P, Martí-Climent JM, García-Granero M, 
Lamet I, Pastor P, Riverol M, Gómez-Isla MT, Peñuelas I, Richter JA, Weiner MW; 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Aisen P, Weiner M, Petersen R, Jack CR Jr, Jagust W, 
Trojanowki JQ, Toga AW, Beckett L, Green RC, Saykin AJ, Morris J, Shaw LM, 
Khachaturian Z, Sorensen G, Carrillo M, Kuller L, Raichle M, Paul S, Davies P, 
Fillit H, Hefti F, Holtzman D, Mesulam M, Potter W, Snyder P, Schwartz A, 
Montine T, Thomas RG, Donohue M, Walter S, Gessert D, Sather T, Jiminez G, 
Beckett L, Harvey D, Donohue M, Bernstein M, Fox N, Thompson P, Schuff N, 
DeCArli C, Borowski B, Gunter J, Senjem M, Vemuri P, Jones D, Kantarci K, Ward 
C, Jagust W, Koeppe RA, Foster N, Reiman EM, Chen K, Mathis C, Landau S, Morris 
JC, Cairns NJ, Householder E, Taylor-Reinwald L, Trojanowki JQ, Lee V, Korecka 
M, Figurski M, Crawford K, Neu S, Saykin AJ, Foroud TM, Potkin S, Shen L, Faber 
K, Kim S, Nho K, Weiner MW, Thal L, Khachaturian Z, Thal L, Buckholtz N, Snyder 
PJ, Potter W, Paul S, Albert M, Frank R, Hsiao J, Kaye J, Quinn J, Lind B, 
Carter R, Dolen S, Schneider LS, Pawluczyk S, Beccera M, Teodoro L, Spann BM, 
Brewer J, Vanderswag H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Avenida Pio 
XII 36, 31008 Pamplona, Spain. jarbizu@unav.es

PURPOSE: To introduce, evaluate and validate a voxel-based analysis method of 
¹⁸F-FDG PET imaging for determining the probability of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
in a particular individual.
METHODS: The subject groups for model derivation comprised 80 healthy subjects 
(HS), 36 patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who converted to AD 
dementia within 18 months, 85 non-converter MCI patients who did not convert 
within 24 months, and 67 AD dementia patients with baseline FDG PET scan were 
recruited from the AD Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Additionally, 
baseline FDG PET scans from 20 HS, 27 MCI and 21 AD dementia patients from our 
institutional cohort were included for model validation. The analysis technique 
was designed on the basis of the AD-related hypometabolic convergence index 
adapted for our laboratory-specific context (AD-PET index), and combined in a 
multivariable model with age and gender for AD dementia detection (AD score). A 
logistic regression analysis of different cortical PET indexes and clinical 
variables was applied to search for relevant predictive factors to include in 
the multivariable model for the prediction of MCI conversion to AD dementia 
(AD-Conv score). The resultant scores were stratified into sixtiles for 
probabilistic diagnosis.
RESULTS: The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) for 
the AD score detecting AD dementia in the ADNI database was 0.879, and the 
observed probability of AD dementia in the six defined groups ranged from 8% to 
100% in a monotonic trend. For predicting MCI conversion to AD dementia, only 
the posterior cingulate index, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score and 
apolipoprotein E4 genotype (ApoE4) exhibited significant independent effects in 
the univariable and multivariable models. When only the latter two clinical 
variables were included in the model, the AUC was 0.742 (95% CI 0.646 - 0.838), 
but this increased to 0.804 (95% CI 0.714 - 0.894, bootstrap p=0.027) with the 
addition of the posterior cingulate index (AD-Conv score). Baseline clinical 
diagnosis of MCI showed 29.7% of converters after 18 months. The observed 
probability of conversion in relation to baseline AD-Conv score was 75% in the 
high probability group (sixtile 6), 34% in the medium probability group (merged 
sixtiles 4 and 5), 20% in the low probability group (sixtile 3) and 7.5% in the 
very low probability group (merged sixtiles 1 and 2). In the validation 
population, the AD score reached an AUC of 0.948 (95% CI 0.625 - 0.969) and the 
AD-Conv score reached 0.968 (95% CI 0.908 - 1.000), with AD patients and MCI 
converters included in the highest probability categories.
CONCLUSION: Posterior cingulate hypometabolism, when combined in a multivariable 
model with age and gender as well as MMSE score and ApoE4 data, improved the 
determination of the likelihood of patients with MCI converting to AD dementia 
compared with clinical variables alone. The probabilistic model described here 
provides a new tool that may aid in the clinical diagnosis of AD and MCI 
conversion.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-013-2458-z
PMID: 23715905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Med Signals Sens. 2021 May 24;11(2):120-130. doi: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_11_20. 
eCollection 2021 Apr-Jun.

Early Detection of Alzheimer's Disease Based on Clinical Trials, 
Three-Dimensional Imaging Data, and Personal Information Using Autoencoders.

Akramifard H(1), Balafar MA(1), Razavi SN(1), Ramli AR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Software Engineering, Faculty of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, University of Tabriz, East Azerbaijan, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Software Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University Putra 
Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: A timely diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is crucial to obtain 
more practical treatments. In this article, a novel approach using Auto-Encoder 
Neural Networks (AENN) for early detection of AD was proposed.
METHOD: The proposed method mainly deals with the classification of multimodal 
data and the imputation of missing data. The data under study involve the 
MiniMental State Examination, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission 
tomography, cerebrospinal fluid data, and personal information. Natural 
logarithm was used for normalizing the data. The Auto-Encoder Neural Networks 
was used for imputing missing data. Principal component analysis algorithm was 
used for reducing dimensionality of data. Support Vector Machine (SVM) was used 
as classifier. The proposed method was evaluated using Alzheimer's Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database. Then, 10fold crossvalidation was used 
to audit the detection accuracy of the method.
RESULTS: The effectiveness of the proposed approach was studied under several 
scenarios considering 705 cases of ADNI database. In three binary classification 
problems, that is AD vs. normal controls (NCs), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
vs. NC, and MCI vs. AD, we obtained the accuracies of 95.57%, 83.01%, and 
78.67%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Experimental results revealed that the proposed method significantly 
outperformed most of the stateoftheart methods.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Medical Signals & Sensors.

DOI: 10.4103/jmss.JMSS_11_20
PMCID: PMC8253314
PMID: 34268100

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


227. Proc IEEE Int Symp Biomed Imaging. 2012 May;2012:1515-1518. doi: 
10.1109/ISBI.2012.6235860. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

COMBINING REGIONAL METRICS FOR DISEASE-RELATED BRAIN POPULATION ANALYSIS.

Ye DH(1), Hamm J(2), Pohl KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, 43210.

In this paper, we present a new metric combining regional measurements to 
improve image based population studies that use manifold learning techniques. 
These studies currently rely on a single score over the whole brain image 
domain. Thus, they require large amount of training data to uncover spatially 
complex variation in the whole brain impacted by diseases. We reduce the impact 
of this issue by first computing pairwise measurements in local regions 
separately and then combining regional measurements into a single pairwise 
metric. We apply the new metric to learn the manifold of ADNI data and evaluate 
the resulting morphological representation by fitting multiple linear regression 
models to the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score. The regression models 
show that the morphological representations from the proposed metric achieves 
higher estimation accuracy of MMSE score compared to those from the conventional 
global scores.

DOI: 10.1109/ISBI.2012.6235860
PMCID: PMC5459375
PMID: 28593031